Title: Simulation Distillation: Pretraining World Models in Simulation for Rapid Real-World Adaptation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.15759v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 00:06:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Simulation Distillation: Pretraining World Models in Simulation for Rapid Real-World Adaptation 

Jacob Levy ∗1 Tyler Westenbroek ∗2 Kevin Huang 2 Fernando Palafox 1 Patrick Yin 2

Shayegan Omidshafiei 3 Dong-Ki Kim 3 Abhishek Gupta 2 David Fridovich-Keil 11University of Texas at Austin 2University of Washington 3FieldAI 

https://sim-dist.github.io Zero-shot Failures Real-World Improvement 

Peg Insertion 

Table Leg 

Slippery Slope 

Foam 

Fig. 1: Failures of zero-shot sim-to-real policies (left). Our framework SimDist rapidly overcomes the dynamics gap and improves performance with minimal real-world interaction. We demonstrate substantial gains in task execution on both precise manipulation and quadrupedal locomotion tasks with only 15-30 minutes of real-world data, substantially outperforming baselines. 

Abstract —Simulation-to-real transfer remains a central chal-lenge in robotics, as mismatches between simulated and real-world dynamics often lead to failures. While reinforcement learn-ing offers a principled mechanism for adaptation, existing sim-to-real finetuning methods struggle with exploration and long-horizon credit assignment in the low-data regimes typical of real-world robotics. We introduce Simulation Distillation 

(SimDist ), a sim-to-real framework that distills structural priors from a simulator into a latent world model and enables rapid real-world adaptation via online planning and supervised 

> ∗

Equal contribution. 

dynamics finetuning. By transferring reward and value models directly from simulation, SimDist provides dense planning signals from raw perception without requiring value learning during deployment. As a result, real-world adaptation reduces to short-horizon system identification, avoiding long-horizon credit assignment and enabling fast, stable improvement. Across precise manipulation and quadruped locomotion tasks, SimDist sub-stantially outperforms prior methods in data efficiency, stability, and final performance. Project website and code: https:// sim-dist.github.io 

> arXiv:2603.15759v1 [cs.RO] 16 Mar 2026

Real-World Deployment 

Expert Policy Training Data Generation  

> Scalable Generation through Massively Parallel Simulation Robust Training with Augmented Data

World Model Pretraining 

> Improvement Enabled by Online Planning with the Adapted World Model
> RL with Established Sim-to-Real Pipelines

+ 

> Expert
> Checkpoints
> Value Function
> Expert + Sub-Optimal Rollouts Action Perturbations
> Expert Path
> Perturbation
> Recovery
> Pretraining
> Dynamics Model
> Encoders
> Reward Model
> Value Model
> World Model Data Augmentations
> Pretrain Loss
> Real-World Improvement
> Dynamics Model
> Encoders
> Reward Model
> Value Model
> Dynamics Model
> Encoders
> Reward Model
> Value Model

Dynamics Finetuning     

> World Model Sampling-Based Planning Real Robot Data
> World Model
> Simulation Dataset
> Real-World Dataset
> Datasets World Model
> Real-World
> Demos
> Simulation
> Adaptation Loss
> Rapid Adaptation via System Identification

## 1 2 3

# 4b 4a Fig. 2: SimDist overview. 1) An expert policy, policy checkpoints, and a value function are trained in simulation using privileged state. 2) Large-scale training data are generated by combining expert and sub-optimal policies with contiguous action perturbations, yielding diverse trajectories with dense reward and value supervision. 3) A planning-oriented latent world model is pretrained on this data, learning representations, dynamics, rewards, and values from raw observations. 4a) At deployment, the learned representation and dense reward and value models are transferred to the real robot to enable planning with the latent dynamics. 4b) Real-world data is then used to finetune only the dynamics via supervised system identification, with representations, rewards, and values frozen. Deployment and finetuning are iterated, enabling rapid and stable real-world adaptation. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Robotic systems must operate in complex, novel environ-ments where success requires rapid deployment-time adap-tation. Learning-based approaches [19, 32, 25] have shown great promise in this setting, but training robots directly in the real world remains challenging due to safety, cost, and time constraints. As a result, simulators have emerged as a powerful tool for scaling robot learning, providing access to large volumes of interaction data and broad coverage over initial conditions and environment parameters [42, 58, 39]. While this strategy has enabled many recent success stories [30, 27, 44], sim-to-real failures remain common due to the inevitable dynamics “gap” between the two domains. Bootstrapping behavior in simulation and finetuning in the real world with limited on-domain data to overcome dynamics mismatch is an attractive paradigm for robotics [46, 57, 50, 49]. However, using existing end-to-end policy optimization approaches for this purpose often suffers per-formance collapse when finetuning in new domains [62, 57] due to catastrophic forgetting of the priors learned during pretraining. This reflects the difficulty of exploration and credit assignment in low-data regimes, particularly when learning from raw perception. Recent off-policy RL methods attempt to improve sample efficiency by aggressively bootstrapping from limited datasets [2, 7, 17, 36], but face brittle trade-offs between data efficiency and training stability. We argue that this behavior stems from a fundamental limitation of end-to-end model-free policy finetuning: by tightly entangling task representations, rewards, and dynamics, these methods force algorithms to relearn the full task structure when transferred to new domains. In this work we ask: how can we retain physical priors and known task structure throughout finetuning? 

We argue that world models, rather than end-to-end policies, are the appropriate abstraction for transferring experience from simulation to the real world. Unlike policies, world models decompose decision making into state representations, reward and value functions, and environment-specific dynamics that are learned jointly but maintained as distinct components. This decomposition enables an approximate separation be-tween global and local task structure. State encoders, rewards, and values capture global structure—such as which objects matter, their semantic roles, and distances to goal config-urations—while the dynamics model captures local, action-dependent behavior specific to the environment. Our key insight is that this global structure is largely invariant across simulation and reality for dynamic, high-precision problems, whereas local dynamics are not. We exploit this asymmetry to focus real-world adaptation on dynamics while preserving global task structure learned in simulation. Concretely, we introduce Simulation Distillation 

(SimDist ), a framework that bootstraps a world model in simulation and adapts in the real world through online plan-ning and supervised finetuning of the latent dynamics model. At deployment, we freeze the state encoder, reward model, and value function learned in simulation, and adapt only the dynamics. The planner uses the frozen reward and value models to estimate long-horizon returns, enabling immediate behavioral improvement as dynamics predictions become more accurate, while avoiding difficult bootstrapping problems. By planning over the world model, the robot can reason coun-terfactually about trajectories it has not directly experienced, mitigating exploration challenges. Altogether, this sidesteps the instability of existing off-policy methods by reducing real-world adaptation to a simple, short-horizon supervised learning problem in latent space. Enabling this reliable and efficient adaptation requires sys-tematically distilling the structure of the simulator into the world model during pretraining. In particular, the dynamics model must generalize from only a small number of real-world samples and remain accurate along the many sub-optimal trajectories sampled by the planner. To achieve this, we build on standard teacher–student distillation frameworks, leveraging privileged, state-based expert policies in simulation to generate high-quality behavior at scale. Importantly, rather than just collecting expert data, we deliberately perturb actions during data generation. This introduces failures and recovery behaviors, yielding broad state–action coverage that keeps representations, rewards, values, and dynamics in-distribution during real-world planning and finetuning. Relying on priv-ileged experts for pretraining enables massive parallelism and scalable training, in contrast to computationally intensive online model-based RL methods [14, 15] whose performance often saturates on challenging robotics problems. We summarize our contributions as follows: 

1) We introduce SimDist , a world-model–based paradigm for sim-to-real transfer that reduces real-world adaptation to a simple supervised dynamics learning problem, avoiding long-horizon credit assignment and enabling reliable, off-policy, and sample-efficient adaptation. SimDist integrates seamlessly with existing student–teacher distillation. 

2) We instantiate SimDist on two precise, contact-rich manipulation tasks and two quadruped locomotion tasks in the real world, achieving effective autonomous improvement with just 15–30 minutes of real-world data. 

3) We show that informative reward and value models trained in simulation can transfer zero-shot to the real world from raw perception, highlighting a promising direction for lever-aging privileged simulation supervision even beyond the settings studied in this work. II. R ELATED WORK 

Real-World Reinforcement Learning. A growing body of work studies reinforcement learning on real-world robotic systems [36, 33, 57, 47, 50, 51, 32, 24, 13, 29]. However, both model-free and model-based approaches remain challenging to apply reliably in low-data regimes and typically require sophisticated regularization. Model-free methods aggressively reuse off-policy data and rely on frequent critic updates [2, 17, 36, 7], often leading to value overestimation and unstable learning. Prior work mitigates these issues using conservative value estimation [28], policy constraints [31, 61, 48], or critic ensembles [6, 12, 18]. Model-based methods instead learn dynamics and reward models [14, 15] to reason about unseen trajectories, but must carefully avoid exploiting model inaccuracies. Common strategies include uncertainty-aware dynamics [9, 33, 23] and penalizing out-of-distribution predictions [59, 60, 11]. Rather than constraining learning, we show that bootstrapping a world model in simulation enables generalization beyond the real-world dataset. 

Adaptation with Physics-based Models. Many lines of work leverage approximate physics-based models for adap-tation and control, but typically rely on simplified, low-dimensional state representations that are brittle in partially observed, contact-rich settings. Classical adaptive control [1, 45, 21] and model-predictive control [38, 10] approaches use highly simplified dynamics, abstracting away complex contacts and interactions. Neural physics engines [55, 41] combine structured system identification with residual learning to adapt high-fidelity simulators using real-world data, but often assume access to object poses, contact labels, or reliable state estimates that degrade under partial observability. Closely related work learns world models from mixtures of simulated and real data [34, 53] or transfers value functions from simulation to guide real-world learning [50, 57], but similarly depends on low-dimensional state observations. We instead propose distilling simulator structure from raw perception to enable in-the-wild adaptation. 

Generative World Models for Robotics. Recent work trains large world models on internet-scale video to learn broad physical priors for robotics [56, 3, 40], sometimes augmented with simulation data [56]. Translating video pre-dictions into executable robot actions typically requires expert demonstrations, either by planning in video space and using inverse models to recover actions [54, 22], or by combining video prediction with behavior cloning [63, 35, 4]. While effective for reproducing demonstrated behaviors, these ap-proaches remain fundamentally constrained by the real-world action distribution. In contrast, SimDist learns world models directly over a wide range low-level robot actions, enabling it to directly improve behaviors beyond the real-world data. III. PRELIMINARIES 

Problem Setting. We consider the problem of controlling a robotic system operating in the real world under partial ob-servability and unmodeled dynamics. Specifically, we assume the dynamics are of the form st+1 ∼ p(·| st, a t) where st ∈ S 

is the underlying state of the system and at ∈ A is the robot action. The underlying state is not directly observable in the real world as the robot only has access to raw observations 

ot ∈ O . We model the control problem as a partially ob-servable Markov decision process (POMDP) defined by the tuple (S, A, O, X , p, r, γ ), with user-specified reward function 

r(st, a t, s t+1 ) and discount factor γ ∈ (0 , 1] , and seek to maximize the discounted return E [P∞ 

> t=0

γtr(st, a t, s t+1 )] . In general, dense informative reward functions are difficult to evaluate directly in the real world, given the difficulty in measuring the underlying state of the system. To render this problem more tractable, we make the following assumption: 

Assumption 1. We assume access to an approximate physics-based simulator st+1 ∼ ˆp(· | st, a t) that provides privileged access to the underlying state st.History Encoder  

> Latent Dynamics Model
> Latent Encoder
> Base Policy
> Future actions
> History Observation
> Return Prediction Action Prediction
> Reward and Value Models Reward and Value Models

Fig. 3: World model architecture. The most recent observation is encoded into a latent representation while a history encoder processes a history of observations and actions. These jointly condition a transformer-based latent dynamics model that predicts future latent trajectories under candidate action sequences. Transformer-based reward and value heads evaluate predicted trajectories to produce reward and value sequences, while a base policy head predicts action chunks used to warm-start sampling-based planning. 

Planning-Oriented Latent World Models. We build on common planning-oriented latent world models from works such as [15, 14]. These approaches learn reward and value models that operate directly on raw observations, enabling planning in the real world using the algorithms outlined below. The primary novelty of SimDist lies in our systematic framework for sim-to-real adaptation of this class of world models, introduced in the following section. We structure our world model according to (1), depicted in Fig. 3: Latent representation: zt = Eθ (ot)

History representation: ht = Cθ (ot−H:t−1, a t−H:t−1)

Latent dynamics: ˆzt+1: t+T = fθ (zt, a t:t+T −1, h t)

Reward Prediction: ˆrt:t+T −1 = Rθ (ˆ zt:t+T , a t:t+T −1)

Value Prediction: ˆvt+1: t+T = Vθ (ˆ zt:t+T )

Base Policy: ˆat:t+H = πθ (zt, h t).

(1) Here Eθ encodes a latent representation zt of the underlying state st directly from raw observation ot; ht is an encoding of history over a window of H timesteps; ˆzt+1: t+T is a predicted sequence of T future latent states generated by the learned model fθ ; and ˆrt:t+T −1 and ˆvt+1: t+T are reward and value estimates. We discuss key architecture decisions in Section IV-C. 

Sampling-Based Planning. We control the robot in the real world with Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) [52] control, a sampling-based Model Predictive Control (MPC) method. At each control step, we sample a batch of candidate future action sequences and evaluate them using the world model (1), ex-tracting the predicted future reward sequence ˆrt:t+T −1 and ter-minal value ˆvt+T , which are combined to compute the trajec-tory return R(at:t+T −1) = γT ˆvt+T + Pt+T −1 

> s=t

γs−t ˆrs. MPPI then computes the control action to execute by importance-weighting sampled trajectories according to their predicted returns. Similar to TD-MPC [15], we warm-start sampling by seeding a subset of candidate action sequences with noise-corrupted outputs of ˆat:t+T −1 from the base policy πθ .IV. S IMULATION DISTILLATION FOR EFFICIENT 

REAL -W ORLD ADAPTATION 

We now introduce Simulation Distillation , aframework for distilling physical priors and task structure into a world model in a form that enables rapid real-world adaptation with online planning and dynamics adaptation. 

A. Pretraining on Simulated Data 

SimDist builds on existing sim-to-real data-generation pipelines that use privileged, state-based expert policies to collect large-scale datasets paired with raw perception. While prior approaches primarily use this data for imitation, planning-based adaptation requires world models that can reason counterfactually about trajectories far beyond the expert and real-world data distributions. In particular, dynamics must generalize from few real-world samples, and reward and value models must reliably discriminate between good and bad trajectories under off-policy action sequences. To meet these requirements, we deliberately inject sub-optimal actions during simulation rollouts, producing a broad training distribution. 

Expert Policy Training. We first train a state-based expert policy πe(st) with PPO [43]. We also save the optimal state-based value function V e(st) and intermediate policy checkpoints {πk}Kk=1 learned during training. 

Generating Diverse Trajectories and Dense Supervision. 

We generate diverse simulation rollouts (Fig. 2) by alternating between an expert policy πe and a set of sub-optimal poli-cies {πk}Kk=1 , and by periodically injecting random action perturbations over short temporal windows. This generates diverse failure and recovery behaviors beyond the nominal expert manifold, enabling the world model to reliably produce predictions about counterfactual trajectories. This results in a dataset Dsim = {(ot, a t, r t, v t)}Nt=0 , where rewards rt are computed from privileged simulator state and value targets vt

are provided by the expert value function V e(st). Crucially, this data-generation process is massively parallelizable and exploits the full training artifact of the simulator—including expert policies, intermediate checkpoints, and value func-tions—to produce rich supervision at scale. The full data generation procedure is provided in Appendix A. 

World Model Pretraining. We pretrain the world model (1) on Dsim by applying the following loss to predictions made at each time step t. Specifically, we feed the history ot−H:t and future actions at:t+T −1 into the model, and then penalize the resulting predictions with the following loss: 

Lsim  

> t

(θ) = 

> T

X

> i=0



∥ˆzt+i+1 − sg (Eθ (ot+i+1 )) ∥22

| {z }

> latent dynamics

+ c1 (ˆ rt+i − rt+i)2

| {z }

> reward

+ c2 (ˆ vt+i+1 − vt+i+1 )2

| {z }

> value

+ c3 1e(at+i)∥ˆat+i − at+i∥22

| {z }

> behavior cloning



,

(2) where sg is the stop-grad operator, constants c1:3 are determined by normalizing over the range for each target to ensure each loss term is roughly on the same scale, and 

1e(at) = 1 if at came from the uncorrupted expert policy and 

1e(at) = 0 otherwise. We apply various data augmentations discussed in Appendices B and C to prevent overfitting to simulated observations an ensure that the model learns ro-bust, transferable representations. In contrast to typical on-line MBRL approaches [15, 14] which are computationally intensive and attempt to bootstrap behavior from scratch, we offload behavior generation to a privileged expert. This reduces pretraining to optimizing a simple, stationary objective over a fixed, large-scale, and diverse simulated dataset. 

B. Real World Transfer and Efficient Dynamics Adaptation 

Our key insight is that global task structure is largely invariant to low-level sim-to-real dynamics gaps. For example, in Peg Insertion (Fig. 1), a meaningful latent state captures the locations of the peg and hole, while the value function encodes distance to the goal and motions leading to successful insertion. This structure persists across the sim-to-real gap, even though the low-level actions required to realize these behaviors differ between domains. Exploiting this decom-position, SimDist finetunes only the environment-specific dynamics model while freezing the encoder, reward, and value functions. Planning with frozen reward and value models en-ables immediate improvement as dynamics predictions become more accurate, without requiring reward or value bootstrapping in the real world. Because the world model can be trained on arbitrary trajectories, SimDist naturally supports off-policy learning and can incorporate prior data such as demonstrations. 

Dynamics Adaptation Loss. When updating the dynamics model, we modify the pretraining loss for predictions made at each time-step t to simply: 

Lreal  

> t

(θ) = PTi=0 ∥ˆzt+i+1 − sg (Eθ (ot+i+1 )) ∥22,

with Cθ , E θ , R θ , V θ , π θ frozen, fθ finetunable . (3) We do not apply data augmentations when optimizing this objective, as pretraining yields a robust encoder Eθ . Because the encoder is frozen, it provides consistent latent targets 

Eθ (ot) throughout finetuning, avoiding the need to boot strap a representation as in (2). 

Iterative Improvement. The overall pipeline for SimDist 

is shown in Fig. 2 and in pseudo-code in Algorithm 1. 

SimDist autonomously improves in the real-world by repeat-edly collecting M on-policy rollouts under the planner, adding this data to the real-world data set Dreal , then finetuning 

fθ to minimize prediction losses as in (3). Notably, because system identification can effectively learn from any real-world trajectories, SimDist is a simple off-policy reinforcement learning strategy which can easily incorporate diverse data sources such as demonstrations or play data into Dreal .

Remark 1. In contrast to standard MBRL frameworks [14, 15], which must jointly bootstrap latent representations, value functions, and policies from scarce in-domain data, SimDist 

Algorithm 1 SimDist  

> 1:

// Pretraining  

> 2:

Perform RL, saving expert policy πe, policy checkpoints 

{πk}Kk=1 , and learned value function V e 

> 3:

Generate dataset Dsim in simulation per Section IV-A  

> 4:

while not converged do  

> 5:

Draw segments {(ot, r t, v t, a t)}i+Tt=i−H ∼ D sim  

> 6:

Update θ, minimizing Lsim  

> t

(θ) at each time step  

> 7:

// Iterative Finetuning  

> 8:

Initialize Dreal with offline real-world data if available  

> 9:

for J iterations do  

> 10:

Collect real-world rollouts {(ot, a t)}Mt=0 with MPPI and world model (1), then add to Dreal  

> 11:

while not converged do  

> 12:

Draw segments {(ot, a t)}i+Tt=i−H ∼ D real  

> 13:

Freeze Cθ , E θ , R θ , V θ , π θ 

> 14:

Update fθ , minimizing Lreal  

> t

(θ)

offloads these challenging objectives to simulation, where diverse data is cheap and plentiful. As a result, real-world adaptation reduces to finetuning only the dynamics via a simple, iterative supervised learning procedure. C. World Model Design Decisions 

In order to successfully improve behavior over the base pol-icy πθ , the planner must sample numerous off-policy rollouts and accurately model returns. The following design decisions are essential for enabling reliable real-time planning. 

Minimal History Representation. Observation histories 

ot−H:t can contain high-dimensional inputs such as images that are costly to process. To reduce inference cost, we split ob-servations ot = ( opt , o et ) into proprioceptive and exteroceptive components and feed only (opt−H:t, a t−H:t, o et ) into the history encoder Cθ . Using only the most recent high-dimensional observation substantially reduces planning latency and, empir-ically, improves training stability by reducing context length. 

Chunked Prediction for Planning. Autoregressive world models [15, 14, 5] require sequential unrolling over the plan-ning horizon, which bottlenecks parallelism when evaluating numerous rollouts. Inspired by [53], our latent dynamics model 

fθ predicts T future states in a single forward pass using a transformer with cross-attention between the encoded history tokens and a candidate action sequence, together with a causal mask. This chunked prediction fully exploits GPU parallelism, dramatically improving planning throughput. 

Sequence-to-Sequence Return Modeling. Prior work often decodes rewards and values with per-timestep MLPs applied independently to each predicted latent state [15, 14, 5]. We instead use transformer-based reward and value models that attend over the entire predicted latent trajectory ˆzt:t+T . This increased capacity aggregates information across the entire tra-jectory, yielding more accurate return estimates and improving planning performance (see Section V-D). 0 20 40 60 80                           

> Data (episodes)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Success Rate
> Peg Insertion (Wide)
> 020 40 60 80
> Data (episodes)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Success Rate
> Table Leg (Wide)
> 010 20 30
> Data (minutes)
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> Forward Progress (m)
> Quadruped - Slippery Slope
> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> Data (episodes)
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Success Rate
> Peg Insertion (Narrow)
> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> Data (episodes)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Success Rate
> Table Leg (Narrow)
> 010 20 30
> Data (minutes)
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Forward Progress (m)
> Quadruped - Foam
> Simulation Distillation
> Diffusion Policy (Real Demos)
> Simulation Distillation +BC
> Diffusion Polcy (Real + Sim Demos)
> IQL
> 0.5 (Real Demos)
> RLPD
> 0.5 (Real + Sim Demos)
> SGFT
> Quadruped Success

Fig. 4: Real-world results. Success rate for two manipulation tasks, computed over 20 trials, and average forward progress for two quadruped locomotion tasks, averaged across all 15 trials (3 speeds, 5 trials each), as a function of real-world finetuning data. SimDist exhibits rapid and consistent improvement with limited data by finetuning only the latent dynamics model while planning with frozen reward and value models. In contrast, direct policy finetuning with the baselines shows limited or no improvement under the same data budgets. 

V. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate the ability of SimDist to adapt in the real world on the four manipulation and quadruped tasks depicted in Fig. 1 and carefully ablate key design decisions in simu-lation. Additional details of experiments can be found in the Appendix. We aim to answer 1) does SimDist outperform existing online RL methods and behavior cloning baselines? 

2) what factors enable the planner to effectively improve per-formance with minimal real-world data? 3) which components of the architecture and pretraining procedure are crucial for the performance of SimDist ?

A. Robotic Systems and Tasks 

Manipulation System and Tasks. Our manipulation ex-periments are conducted on a UR5e robot. Actions are six-dimensional relative end-effector pose targets, and observa-tions include joint states and three 224 × 224 RGB images from wrist-mounted, overhead, and side-view cameras. Each image is encoded with a pretrained ResNet-18, fused with proprioception, and mapped to a 64-dimensional latent state z.Training uses 100K trajectories, approximately 36% of which are optimal expert sequences (see Appendix B for details). We use history and prediction horizons H = T = 5 and control the robot at 5 Hz . Expert policies are trained following [58]. We consider the following precise assembly tasks, with initial conditions drawn from a Narrow ( 2 cm × 2 cm ) or Wide (35 cm × 35 cm ) grid: 

1) Peg Insertion. We construct a peg insertion task similar to the 16 mm square peg task from [39]. This task requires picking the peg, aligning it with the hole, and insertion. 

2) Table Leg. We use the assets from [16] to generate a task where a table leg must be picked, aligned, and threaded into a hole on a table. 

Quadruped System and Tasks. We conduct quadrupedal experiments on a Unitree Go2 platform, with actions given as position targets for the 12 joints. Observations include proprioceptive signals and a local terrain height map, which is encoded by Eθ using a CNN and fused with low-dimensional observations via an MLP to produce the latent state z. The policy πθ , reward Rθ , and value Vθ are additionally condi-tioned on desired base forward, lateral, and yaw velocities. Pretraining uses 100M simulated trajectories, of which 55 .7% 

come from an expert policy trained in IsaacLab [37]. We use history and prediction horizons H = T = 25 and plan at 

50 Hz on a laptop with an RTX 4090M. See Appendix C for details. We consider the following tasks: 1) Slippery Slope. The robot traverses straight over two panels inclined at 3.0◦ and 5.7◦, respectively. The panels are covered with PTFE (Teflon), and the robot’s feet are wrapped with thermoplastic, creating extremely low-friction contacts. A trial is successful if the robot traverses 1.82 m ,clearing both panels. We conduct five trials per commanded forward speed at 0.1, 0.3, and 0.5 m s −1.

2) Foam. The robot traverses two 5 cm thick overlapping memory foam pads whose compliant dynamics are not modeled in simulation. A trial is successful if the robot traverses 3.00 m to clear the foam. We conduct five trials per commanded forward speed at 0.2, 0.7, and 1.2 m s −1.

B. Real-World Learning Methods. 

We evaluate SimDist against state-of-the-art real-world RL methods and additionally behavior cloning baselines on manipulation tasks. All RL methods use the same encoders as 

SimDist , but with an MLP policy head (no action chunking). 

Manipulation. For each task, we collect 20 real-world demonstrations via teleoperation. We evaluate two variants of SimDist : (i) SimDist , which adapts only the latent dynamics model using on-policy rollouts (Algorithm 1), and (ii) SimDist +BC, which additionally finetunes the base policy πθ using expert action labels. In both cases, the dy-namics model is updated after every 20 real-world episodes. We compare against model-free RL baselines RLPD [2] and IQL [26], trained from sparse rewards to reflect common manipulation settings where dense rewards are difficult to specify; these baselines update after every episode. We also include SGFT-SAC [57], a model-free method that transfers a simulated value function, isolating the benefit of full world-model adaptation beyond value transfer alone. Finally, we compare against behavior cloning baselines—Diffusion Policy [8] and π0.5 [20]—trained on real-world demonstrations, as well as variants trained on both real-world demonstrations and the simulated dataset used by SimDist . All manipulation methods except SimDist without demonstrations are given access to the same 20 real-world demonstrations. 

Quadruped. For quadruped locomotion, we compare 

SimDist against the off-policy algorithm RLPD [2] and the offline-to-online finetuning method from IQL [26], whose value function is pretrained in simulation. All methods use the same learned reward model from SimDist , allowing us to isolate the effect of different adaptation strategies. 

C. Real World Improvement Results 

Figure 4 summarizes our results. Across all tasks, SimDist 

consistently outperforms prior approaches, achieving substan-tially higher success rates with far greater sample efficiency than online RL baselines, while autonomously improving well beyond the performance of behavior cloning methods. Across the board SimDist typically reaches scores around 2× higher than any baseline. Standard RL finetuning methods frequently exhibit catastrophic forgetting, with performance collapsing during adaptation, whereas SimDist makes steady, mono-tonic progress throughout training. SGFT avoids catastrophic 

Fig. 5: Value predictions from SimDist along successful and failed real-world Peg trajectories starting from the same initial condition. The predicted values track task progress and clearly distinguish successful from failure. 

Fig. 6: Scatter-Plot showing successful and failed attempts at solving the Peg Wide task for Diffusion Policy (Right) and the final trained policy for SimDist (Left). The broad coverage of pretraining data for SimDist 

> enables efficiently learning policies which are far more robust than baselines.

collapse by transferring value functions from simulation, but remains significantly more sample inefficient than SimDist ,highlighting the importance of adapting a full world model. In-terestingly, demonstrations provide a larger boost to SimDist 

on the Leg task, where the precise screwing motion was dif-ficult to transfer. This highlights how SimDist can naturally leverage demonstrations when available. Notably, the performance gap between SimDist and all baselines widens on more challenging tasks, particularly when comparing narrow versus wide ranges of initial conditions. This trend underscores the benefit of broad simulation pre-training, which enables SimDist to generalize across diverse initial states and adapt reliably in difficult real-world regimes. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 6, which visualizes successful and failed initial conditions for SimDist and Diffusion Pol-icy on Peg Hard, revealing the substantially greater robustness of policies learned by SimDist .

D. Analyzing Real-World Predictions and Effects on Planning 

The planner used by SimDist can only improve behavior if it can reliably distinguish trajectories with high and low returns. This requires both accurate dynamics predictions and 0 50 100 150 200 250 

> Timestep
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> Latent Dynamics Loss  Pretrained
> Finetuned

(a) (b) Actual  

> Pretrained
> Finetuned

(c) Samples (Finetuned)  

> Plan (Finetuned)
> Plan (Pretrained)

(d) 

Fig. 7: (a) Finetuning drastically lowers dynamics prediction loss during a quadruped Slippery Slope trial. (b) Overlaid frames showing the front left foot slipping during the trial. (c) Foot-trajectory predictions from the world model at the same instant: the finetuned model correctly anticipates future slippage, while the pretrained model fails to do so. (d) Visualization of sampling-based planning. Candidate action sequences are evaluated with the world model to produce planned foot trajectories for each leg. Sampled trajectories are shown from the finetuned dynamics model, along with the resulting optimal plans under the finetuned and pretrained models. The finetuned model produces plans that account for real world dynamics mismatch, while the pretrained model generates qualitatively different trajectories. 

successful transfer of reward and value models. We examine value transfer in Fig. 5, which plots predicted values over time for successful and failed trajectories, both collected with teleoperation from the same initial condition. For the successful rollout, predicted value increases consistently over time, while remaining lower for the failed trajectory. Thus the transferred encoder Eθ and value function Vθ can reliably discriminate between successful and failed trajectories .We next evaluate dynamics prediction accuracy on the Quadruped Slippery Slope task in Fig. 7a. We roll a held-out real-world trajectory through the world model and compute the latent dynamics loss (3) at each timestep, yielding an average loss of 0.076 for the pretrained model and 0.019 after finetun-ing. To visualize the impact of this improvement, we decode predicted latent states into predicted front-left foot positions in Fig. 7c. Before finetuning, the model incorrectly predicts stable contact on the PTFE surface and fails to anticipate slip; after finetuning, it accurately predicts future slippage, closely matching the real trajectory (Fig. 7b). This illustrates how broad simulation pretraining enables the dynamics model to generalize to real-world trajectories outside the training set. Finally, improved dynamics predictions directly reshape planning behavior. As shown in Fig. 7d, trajectory samples generated with the finetuned model reflect the altered contact dynamics and lead the planner to select plans that account for real-world slip. In contrast, plans derived from the pretrained model are qualitatively inconsistent with the true dynamics. Together, these results show that finetuning corrects latent dynamics errors in a way that meaningfully changes the planner’s trajectory distribution, explaining the rapid real-world performance gains observed in Fig. 4. 

E. Ablating Key Design Decisions 

We ablate key components of SimDist by modifying world-model pretraining and evaluating the resulting closed-loop planning policies in simulation. Results are summarized in Table I, where we evaluate policies under a wide range domain randomization for both manipulation and quadrupeds (see Appendix D for details). 

Scaling Simulation Data. We study the effect of dataset TABLE I: Ablation results in simulation, reporting success rates for ma-nipulation tasks and average state-based reward per episode for the quadruped. Peg Insertion Table Leg Quadruped                   

> SimDist 0.90 0.85 22.78 50% data 0.72 0.61 22.73 10% data 0.06 0.02 19.38 Expert Data Only 0.10 0.05 16.68 MLP Reward+Value Models 0.82 0.60 19.47 Raw Obs. Reconstruction 0.32 0.21 23.34

scale by reducing simulation rollouts to 10% and 50% of the full pretraining data. Performance drops sharply as data is reduced for both systems, indicating that large-scale pretrain-ing is critical for achieving the coverage required for reliable planning. 

Data Diversity. We next evaluate the role of data diversity by comparing pretraining on expert-only trajectories to our mixed datasets with equal data volume. Expert-only data leads to a substantial performance drop, highlighting the importance of diverse, perturbed rollouts for learning dynamics and value estimates that remain accurate under off-policy planning. 

Reward and Value Transformers. We ablate the use of sequence-to-sequence transformers for reward and value pre-diction, replacing them with per-timestep MLP decoders as in [14, 15]. This consistently degrades performance across tasks. We attribute this to the inability of per-step models to capture trajectory-level structure, which is essential for accurately evaluating candidate action sequences during planning. 

Reconstruction Loss. Finally, we study the effect of adding an observation reconstruction loss to the dynamics objective, a common design choice in MBRL [14, 3]. While recon-struction slightly improves quadruped performance, it provides no qualitative benefit and leads to a steep performance drop for manipulation. We hypothesize that reconstructing high-dimensional visual observations encourages overfitting to task-irrelevant details, which interferes with learning compact latent dynamics suitable for planning. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We introduced SimDist , a framework for sim-to-real transfer and real-world adaptation that exploits the modular structure of world models to directly target the dynamics gap between simulation and reality. Across two precise manipu-lation tasks and two quadruped locomotion tasks, SimDist 

significantly outperforms prior approaches in both sample efficiency and robustness, achieving consistent improvement where standard RL finetuning methods often collapse. While our experiments focus on single-task settings with high-fidelity simulators, future work will scale SimDist to multi-task world models and broader domains. More broadly, freezing representations and task structure while adapting only dy-namics offers a general and effective paradigm for efficient adaptation beyond sim-to-real transfer. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors would like to thank Trey Smith and Brian Coltin for their helpful insights and feedback. This work was supported by a NASA Space Technology Graduate Research Opportunity under award 80NSSC23K1192. REFERENCES 

[1] Karl Johan ˚ Astr¨ om. Adaptive control. In Mathematical System Theory: The Influence of RE Kalman , pages 437– 450. Springer, 1995. [2] Philip J Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learning with offline data. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1577–1594. PMLR, 2023. [3] Jake Bruce, Michael D Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, et al. Genie: Generative interactive environments. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [4] Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao Wu, Jiafeng Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158 ,2024. [5] Chang Chen, Yi-Fu Wu, Jaesik Yoon, and Sungjin Ahn. Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning with transformer world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09481 , 2022. [6] Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W. Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-learning: Learn-ing fast without a model. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2021. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=AY8zfZm0tDd. [7] Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-learning: Learn-ing fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [8] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 2024. [9] Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. [10] Jared Di Carlo, Patrick M. Wensing, Benjamin Katz, Gerardo Bledt, and Sangbae Kim. Dynamic locomotion in the mit cheetah 3 through convex model-predictive control. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 1–9, 2018. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2018.8594448. [11] Yunhai Feng, Nicklas Hansen, Ziyan Xiong, Chan-dramouli Rajagopalan, and Xiaolong Wang. Finetuning offline world models in the real world, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16029. [12] Tuomas Haarnoja, Sehoon Ha, Aurick Zhou, Jie Tan, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Learning to walk via deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.11103 , 2018. [13] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905 , 2018. [14] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mo-hammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [15] Nicklas A Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Tem-poral difference learning for model predictive control. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8387–8406. PMLR, 2022. [16] Minho Heo, Youngwoon Lee, Doohyun Lee, and Joseph J. Lim. Furniturebench: Reproducible real-world benchmark for long-horizon complex manipulation. In 

Robotics: Science and Systems , 2023. [17] Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Taisei Hashimoto, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka. Dropout q-functions for doubly efficient reinforcement learning. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022. [18] Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Taisei Hashimoto, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka. Dropout q-functions for doubly efficient reinforcement learn-ing. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= xCVJMsPv3RT. [19] Physical Intelligence, Ali Amin, Raichelle Aniceto, Ash-win Balakrishna, Kevin Black, Ken Conley, Grace Con-nors, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Jared DiCarlo, et al. Pi*0.6: a vla that learns from experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14759 , 2025. [20] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. pi0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. [21] Petros A Ioannou and Jing Sun. Robust adaptive control ,volume 1. PTR Prentice-Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1996. [22] Joel Jang, Seonghyeon Ye, Zongyu Lin, Jiannan Xiang, Johan Bjorck, Yu Fang, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, Kaushil Kundalia, Yen-Chen Lin, et al. Dreamgen: Unlocking generalization in robot learning through video world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12705 , 2025. [23] Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based pol-icy optimization, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906. 08253. [24] Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Sergey Levine. Scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Aude Billard, Anca Dragan, Jan Peters, and Jun Morimoto, editors, 

Proceedings of The 2nd Conference on Robot Learn-ing , volume 87 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 651–673. PMLR, 29–31 Oct 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v87/kalashnikov18a.html. [25] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [26] Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [27] Ashish Kumar, Zipeng Fu, Deepak Pathak, and Jitendra Malik. Rma: Rapid motor adaptation for legged robots. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04034 , 2021. [28] Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline reinforcement learning, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.04779. [29] JB Lanier, Kyungmin Kim, Armin Karamzade, Yifei Liu, Ankita Sinha, Kat He, Davide Corsi, and Roy Fox. Adapting world models with latent-state dynamics residuals, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.02252. [30] Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science robotics , 5 (47):eabc5986, 2020. [31] Kun Lei, Huanyu Li, Dongjie Yu, Zhenyu Wei, Lingxiao Guo, Zhennan Jiang, Ziyu Wang, Shiyu Liang, and Huazhe Xu. Rl-100: Performant robotic manipulation with real-world reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14830 , 2025. [32] Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(39):1–40, 2016. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v17/15-522.html. [33] Jacob Levy, Tyler Westenbroek, and David Fridovich-Keil. Learning to walk from three minutes of real-world data with semi-structured dynamics models. In Confer-ence on Robot Learning , pages 2061–2079. PMLR, 2025. [34] Chenhao Li, Andreas Krause, and Marco Hutter. Offline robotic world model: Learning robotic policies without a physics simulator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16680 ,2025. [35] Shuang Li, Yihuai Gao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Shuran Song. Unified video action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00200 , 2025. [36] Jianlan Luo, Zheyuan Hu, Charles Xu, You Liang Tan, Jacob Berg, Archit Sharma, Stefan Schaal, Chelsea Finn, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Serl: A software suite for sample-efficient robotic reinforcement learning. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 16961–16969. IEEE, 2024. [37] Mayank Mittal, Pascal Roth, James Tigue, Antoine Richard, Octi Zhang, Peter Du, Antonio Serrano-Mu˜ noz, Xinjie Yao, Ren´ e Zurbr¨ ugg, Nikita Rudin, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Milad Rakhsha, Alain Denzler, Eric Hei-den, Ales Borovicka, Ossama Ahmed, Iretiayo Akinola, Abrar Anwar, Mark T. Carlson, Ji Yuan Feng, Ani-mesh Garg, Renato Gasoto, Lionel Gulich, Yijie Guo, M. Gussert, Alex Hansen, Mihir Kulkarni, Chenran Li, Wei Liu, Viktor Makoviychuk, Grzegorz Malczyk, Ham-mad Mazhar, Masoud Moghani, Adithyavairavan Mu-rali, Michael Noseworthy, Alexander Poddubny, Nathan Ratliff, Welf Rehberg, Clemens Schwarke, Ritvik Singh, James Latham Smith, Bingjie Tang, Ruchik Thaker, Matthew Trepte, Karl Van Wyk, Fangzhou Yu, Alex Mil-lane, Vikram Ramasamy, Remo Steiner, Sangeeta Sub-ramanian, Clemens Volk, CY Chen, Neel Jawale, Ash-win Varghese Kuruttukulam, Michael A. Lin, Ajay Man-dlekar, Karsten Patzwaldt, John Welsh, Huihua Zhao, Fatima Anes, Jean-Francois Lafleche, Nicolas Mo¨ enne-Loccoz, Soowan Park, Rob Stepinski, Dirk Van Gelder, Chris Amevor, Jan Carius, Jumyung Chang, Anka He Chen, Pablo de Heras Ciechomski, Gilles Daviet, Mo-hammad Mohajerani, Julia von Muralt, Viktor Reut-skyy, Michael Sauter, Simon Schirm, Eric L. Shi, Pierre Terdiman, Kenny Vilella, Tobias Widmer, Gordon Yeo-man, Tiffany Chen, Sergey Grizan, Cathy Li, Lotus Li, Connor Smith, Rafael Wiltz, Kostas Alexis, Yan Chang, David Chu, Linxi ”Jim” Fan, Farbod Farshidian, Ankur Handa, Spencer Huang, Marco Hutter, Yashraj Narang, Soha Pouya, Shiwei Sheng, Yuke Zhu, Miles Macklin, Adam Moravanszky, Philipp Reist, Yunrong Guo, David Hoeller, and Gavriel State. Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation framework for multi-modal robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04831 , 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04831. [38] Manfred Morari and Jay H Lee. Model predictive control: past, present and future. Computers & chemical engineering , 23(4-5):667–682, 1999. [39] Yashraj Narang, Kier Storey, Iretiayo Akinola, Miles Macklin, Philipp Reist, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Adam Moravanszky, Gavriel State, Michelle Lu, et al. Factory: Fast contact for robotic assembly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03532 , 2022. [40] Jack Parker-Holder, Philip Ball, Jake Bruce, Vibhavari Dasagi, Kristian Holsheimer, Christos Kaplanis, Alexan-dre Moufarek, Guy Scully, Jeremy Shar, Jimmy Shi, Stephen Spencer, Jessica Yung, Michael Dennis, Sul-tan Kenjeyev, Shangbang Long, Vlad Mnih, Harris Chan, Maxime Gazeau, Bonnie Li, Fabio Pardo, Luyu Wang, Lei Zhang, Frederic Besse, Tim Harley, Anna Mitenkova, Jane Wang, Jeff Clune, Demis Hassabis, Raia Hadsell, Adrian Bolton, Satinder Singh, and Tim Rockt¨ aschel. Genie 2: A large-scale foundation world model. 2024. URL https://deepmind.google/discover/ blog/genie-2-a-large-scale-foundation-world-model/. [41] Samuel Pfrommer, Mathew Halm, and Michael Posa. Contactnets: Learning discontinuous contact dynamics with smooth, implicit representations. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2279–2291. PMLR, 2021. [42] Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning , pages 91–100. PMLR, 2022. [43] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [44] Ritvik Singh, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, Nathan Ratliff, and Karl Van Wyk. Dextrah-rgb: Visuomotor policies to grasp anything with dexterous hands. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01791 , 2024. [45] Jean-Jacques E Slotine and Weiping Li. On the adaptive control of robot manipulators. The international journal of robotics research , 6(3):49–59, 1987. [46] Laura Smith, J Chase Kew, Xue Bin Peng, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, and Sergey Levine. Legged robots that keep on learning: Fine-tuning locomotion policies in the real world. In 2022 international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 1593–1599. IEEE, 2022. [47] Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Awalk in the park: Learning to walk in 20 minutes with model-free reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07860 , 2022. [48] Laura Smith, Yunhao Cao, and Sergey Levine. Grow your limits: Continuous improvement with real-world rl for robotic locomotion. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 10829–10836. IEEE, 2024. [49] Andrew Wagenmaker, Kevin Huang, Liyiming Ke, Kevin Jamieson, and Abhishek Gupta. Overcoming the sim-to-real gap: Leveraging simulation to learn to explore for real-world rl. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:78715–78765, 2024. [50] Tyler Westenbroek, Fernando Castaneda, Ayush Agrawal, Shankar Sastry, and Koushil Sreenath. Lyapunov design for robust and efficient robotic reinforcement learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06721. [51] Tyler Westenbroek, Jacob Levy, and David Fridovich-Keil. Enabling efficient, reliable real-world reinforce-ment learning with approximate physics-based models. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2478–2497. PMLR, 2023. [52] Grady Williams, Paul Drews, Brian Goldfain, James M Rehg, and Evangelos A Theodorou. Aggressive driving with model predictive path integral control. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 1433–1440. IEEE, 2016. [53] Wenli Xiao, Haoru Xue, Tony Tao, Dvij Kalaria, John M Dolan, and Guanya Shi. Anycar to anywhere: Learning universal dynamics model for agile and adaptive mobil-ity. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 8819–8825. IEEE, 2025. [54] Amber Xie, Oleh Rybkin, Dorsa Sadigh, and Chelsea Finn. Latent diffusion planning for imitation learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16925 , 2025. [55] Jie Xu, Eric Heiden, Iretiayo Akinola, Dieter Fox, Miles Macklin, and Yashraj Narang. Neural robot dynamics. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15755 , 2025. [56] Mengjiao Yang, Yilun Du, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06114 , 1(2):6, 2023. [57] Patrick Yin, Tyler Westenbroek, Simran Bagaria, Kevin Huang, Ching-an Cheng, Andrey Kobolov, and Ab-hishek Gupta. Rapidly adapting policies to the real world via simulation-guided fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02705 , 2025. [58] Patrick Yin, Tyler Westenbroek, Zhengyu Zhang, Ignacio Dagnino, Eeshani Shilamkar, Numfor Mbiziwo-Tiapo, Simran Bagaria, Xinlei Liu, Galen Mullins, Andrey Kolobov, and Abhishek Gupta. Emergent dexterity via diverse resets and large-scale reinforcement learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2026. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=nAO9LcV7nE. [59] Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33: 14129–14142, 2020. [60] Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Ra-jeswaran, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 34: 28954–28967, 2021. [61] Jiahui Zhang, Yusen Luo, Abrar Anwar, Sumedh Anand Sontakke, Joseph J Lim, Jesse Thomason, Erdem Biyik, and Jesse Zhang. Rewind: Language-guided rewards teach robot policies without new demonstrations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.10911. [62] Zhiyuan Zhou, Andy Peng, Qiyang Li, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. Efficient online reinforcement learn-ing fine-tuning need not retain offline data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07762 , 2024. [63] Chuning Zhu, Raymond Yu, Siyuan Feng, Benjamin Burchfiel, Paarth Shah, and Abhishek Gupta. Unified world models: Coupling video and action diffusion for pretraining on large robotic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02792 , 2025. APPENDIX 

A. Diverse Data Generation Details 

Algorithm 2 details the data generation process. Data gen-eration proceeds with running many environments in parallel. For the j-th environment, we sample a diagonal action-noise covariance Σj , where each element on the diagonal is sampled between a minimum and maximum variance: 

σi ∼ U[σmin  

> i

, σ max  

> i

]. When each environment is reset, we sample contiguous noise intervals during which Gaussian noise is added to policy actions. In addition, each environ-ment is assigned a randomly selected policy checkpoint from 

{πk}Kk=1 , or the expert policy πe. Together, policy mixing and temporally structured action noise produce a dataset that captures both expert-like trajectories and systematic deviations beyond the optimal manifold, which is critical for world-model training. During rollouts, we query the optimal state-based value function V e at each visited state to generate value targets vt for distilling an approximate optimal value function (Section IV-A). We also record an expert action flag bet that distinguishes the expert actions from the expert policy πe

versus noised or earlier-checkpoint actions to support behavior cloning (Section IV-A). 

B. Manipulation Experiment Details 

Expert Policy Training. For our manipulation experts we use the expert policies πe and value function V e from [58], replicating the training from this work exactly. For the sake of brevity, we refer the reader to [58] for more details, including the exact rewards we use. 

Data Generation. To generate the simulation dataset Dsim ,environments are reset with sub-optimal policies {πk}Kk=1 

with probability 0.5, and Gaussian action perturbations are injected in contiguous intervals sampled from U[1 , 5] steps, interleaved with noise-free intervals sampled from U[5 , 10] 

steps. We generate 100k trajectories for each tasks, of which approximately 36% optimal actions. We save policies every 100 checkpoints up to checkpoint 1000. 

World Model Structure. The encoder for the world model first passes each of the three camera images through a ResNet-18 encoder pretrained on imagenet, producing embeddings of size 3 × 512 , which are stacked and concatenated with the robots 6 joint observations and then passed through an MLP to produce the latent z. Specific parameters are in Table II. 

World Model Pretraining. We pretrain the world model for two epochs over the full simulation dataset Dsim . Using a batch size of 256 and approximately 200k gradient updates. Optimization is performed with Adam using an initial learning rate of 2 × 10 −4, which is annealed to 1 × 10 −4 via a cosine decay schedule, with a linear warmup over the first 10,000 steps. We apply data augmentation by injecting zero-mean Gaussian noise into the proprioceptive observations, and TABLE II: World model architectural parameters for manipulation. Parameter Value Embedding dimension 64 All transformers MLP hidden size 256 Dynamics transformer layers 3Dynamics transformer heads 4Reward transformer layers 1Reward transformer heads 1Value transformer layers 1Value transformer heads 1Base policy transformer layers 4Base policy transformer heads 8

Algorithm 2 Diverse Data Generation  

> 1:

Input: Expert policy πe, policy checkpoints {πk}Kk=1 ,optimal value function V e 

> 2:

Output: Simulation dataset Dsim  

> 3:

for environment j ∈ { 1 . . . N E } do  

> 4:

Sample action noise variance: Σj = diag (σ)

with σi ∼ U [σmin  

> i

, σ max  

> i

]; i ∈ { 1, . . . , dim (A)} 

> 5:

for t = 0 to number of steps NT do  

> 6:

for environment j ∈ { 1 . . . N E } do  

> 7:

if st is terminal then  

> 8:

Reset environment  

> 9:

Sample noise intervals Tnoise  

> 10:

Randomly select a policy πk from {πk}Kk=1 

and assign it to the environment.  

> 11:

εt ∼ N (0 , Σj ) if t ∈ T noise , else εt ← 0 

> 12:

at ← πk(st) + εt 

> 13:

bet ← 1 if (using expert πe and εt = 0 ), else bet ← 0 

> 14:

vt ← V e(st) 

> 15:

(st+1 , o t, r t) = EnvStep (st, a t) 

> 16:

Add (ot, a t, b et , r t, v t) to Dsim 

visual augmentations such as color jitter, gaussian blurring and random cropping. 

Hardware Deployment. We use MPPI as implemented in TD-MPC [15] with the hyperparameters listed in Table III. TABLE III: MPPI parameters for manipulation. Parameter Value Candidate actions batch size 250 Noised base policy actions batch size 100 Solver iterations 3Initial action standard deviation 1.0 Minimum action standard deviation 0.05 Base policy action standard deviation 0.1 Elites 64 Temperature 0.4 Momentum 0.0 Discount 0.99 

C. Quadruped Experiment Details 

Expert Policy Training. We train a state-based expert pol-icy πe and its associated optimal value function V e using PPO in IsaacLab [37]. Both the policy and value networks are MLPs with three hidden layers of width 512 and operate on privileged simulator state variables listed in Table IV. The expert is trained with a dense state-based reward composed of the terms summarized in Table V; full implementation details will be released with the public code. To improve robustness and cov-erage, we apply domain randomization over the parameters in Table IV and randomize terrain conditions across steps, boxes, rough terrain, and slopes, using a curriculum that gradually increases terrain difficulty. Training is performed with 4096 parallel simulation environments over 5000 PPO iterations, with 24 environment steps per iteration, for a total of 490M environment steps. We save policy checkpoints at iterations 

{0, 50 , 100 , 150 , 200 , 250 , 300 , 400 , 500 , 1000 , 2000 }.

Data Generation. To generate the simulation dataset Dsim ,environments are reset with sub-optimal policies {πk}Kk=1 

with probability 0.5, and Gaussian action perturbations are injected in contiguous intervals sampled from U[1 , 50] steps, interleaved with noise-free intervals sampled from U[25 , 500] 

steps. We run 4096 parallel environments for 25000 steps, yielding approximately 100M data points, of which 55 .7% 

correspond to uncorrupted expert actions. Data generation takes approximately 7 hours with a single NVIDIA RTX 4500 Ada GPU. 

World Model Structure. Figure 8 illustrates the world model architecture, and Table VII lists the corresponding model parameters used in the quadruped experiments. The observation space for the quadruped is given in Table VI. The history encoder processes a history of proprioceptive observations (all observations except the height map) and actions by first projecting each input, assigning a type embed-ding to distinguish observations from actions, and interleaving the resulting embeddings to form the history representation 

ht. The latent encoder Eθ encodes the local terrain height map using a CNN followed by spatial encoding, flattening, and projection; this representation is concatenated with the projected latest proprioceptive observation and passed through an MLP to produce the latent state embedding. Commands consist of the desired forward, lateral, and yaw velocities of the base gt := ( vxt , v yt , ω t). The future commands gt:t+T −1 are concatenated to the inputs of the base policy πθ , reward model 

Rθ , and value model Vθ .

World Model Pretraining. We pretrain the world model for two epochs over the full simulation dataset Dsim . Using a batch size of 512, this corresponds to approximately 3.69 ×10 5

gradient update steps. Optimization is performed with Adam using an initial learning rate of 2 × 10 −4, which is annealed to 

1 × 10 −4 via a cosine decay schedule, with a linear warmup over the first 10,000 steps. We apply data augmentation by injecting zero-mean Gaussian noise into the input observations (both proprioceptive and height map) during training. Pretrain-ing requires approximately 28 hours on a single NVIDIA RTX 4500 Ada GPU. 

Hardware Deployment. We use MPPI as implemented in TD-MPC [15] with the hyperparameters listed in Table VIII. To encourage straight-line locomotion during quadruped ex-periments, we compute commanded base velocities gt from the robot’s current base pose using a PD controller on position, TABLE IV: Privileged simulator state space for the quadruped, along with domain randomization ranges, where applicable. State Variable Dim. Domain Rand. Base linear velocity 3 -Base angular velocity 3 -Projected gravity vector 3 -Commanded base twist 3 -Joint angles 12 -Joint speeds 12 -Previous action 12 -Cosine / sine of phase 2 -Height map (21 , 15) -Foot force wrenches (4 , 6) -Foot heights 4 -Base mass 1 −1.0, +3 .0 kg              

> Static / dynamic friction 2[0 .2,1.2]
> Coefficient of restitution 1[0 .0,0.3]
> Joint stiffness 12 ±10%
> Joint damping 12 ±10%
> Joint friction 12 [0 .0,0.05]

TABLE V: State-based reward terms used for quadruped expert policy training. Term Weight Commanded x, y -velocity tracking reward 1.5               

> Commanded yaw rate tracking reward 0.75
> Desired gait reward 0.05
> Desired gait foot height reward 0.2
> Base z-velocity penalty −2.0
> Base angular velocity penalty −0.05
> Base orientation penalty −4.0
> Deviation from default hip joint angles penalty −0.25
> Joint torque penalty −2.0×10 −4
> Joint acceleration penalty −2.5×10 −7
> Action rate penalty −0.01

and provide these commands to the world model. 

Detailed Results. Table IX reports detailed real-world quadruped locomotion results on both tasks across commanded forward speeds. We report both success rate (successful trials out of five) and average forward progress (mean ±

standard deviation) over all trials at each speed. The Pre-trained model corresponds to zero-shot deployment of the simulation-pretrained world model without any real-world finetuning. While this model occasionally achieves partial forward progress, it fails to complete the task reliably, high-lighting the severity of the sim-to-real dynamics gap. The 

Single-step BC policy , which serves as the initial policy for the RLPD and IQL baselines prior to finetuning, improves performance in some settings but remains inconsistent and rarely achieves full task completion. After real-world finetuning (32.1 minutes of data for Foam TABLE VI: Observation space for the quadruped. Observation Dimension Base linear velocity (local frame) 3Base angular velocity (local frame) 3Projected gravity vector 3Joint angles 12 Joint speeds 12 Cosine and sine of phase 2Height map (21 , 15) MLP 

> ...  ...
> MLP
> CNN
> MLP
> Proj.
> Flatten
> Concat
> Temporal Embed, Type Embed, Interleave
> ...
> Dynamics Transformer Decoder
> ... ...
> ...
> Concat, Project, Temporal embed
> Project, Temporal embed
> Project, Temporal embed
> Policy Transformer Decoder
> Proj.
> ...
> ...
> Reward Transformer Encoder
> Proj.
> Concat, Project, Temporal embed
> Value Transformer Encoder
> Proj.
> ...  ...
> Context
> History Encoder Encoder
> Prediction Base Policy

Fig. 8: Detailed world model architecture for the quadruped. 

TABLE VII: World model architectural parameters for the quadruped. Parameter Value Embedding dimension 64 Proprioceptive observations MLP hidden dims 128, 128 CNN kernel size 3CNN strides 2, 2, 2 CNN features 8, 16, 32 All transformers MLP hidden size 256 Dynamics transformer layers 2Dynamics transformer heads 8Reward transformer layers 1Reward transformer heads 1Value transformer layers 1Value transformer heads 1Base policy transformer layers 4Base policy transformer heads 8

TABLE VIII: MPPI parameters for the quadruped. Parameter Value Candidate actions batch size 450 Noised base policy actions batch size 22 Solver iterations 8Initial action standard deviation 2.0 Minimum action standard deviation 0.05 Base policy action standard deviation 0.05 Elites 64 Temperature 0.25 Momentum 0.0 Discount 0.99 

and 35.7 minutes for Slippery Slope), SimDist consistently achieves the highest success rates and forward progress across all tested speeds. In contrast, both IQL and RLPD exhibit limited improvement despite access to the same real-world data budget. In particular, RLPD destabilized the robot during adaptation on the Foam task and is therefore not reported for that condition. 

D. Ablations Details 

Each ablation corresponds to a separately pretrained world model. Across all ablations, the same planning hyperpa-rameters and evaluation environments are used, and each configuration is evaluated on an identical set of randomized environments. Next, we discuss platform specific details. 

Manipulation. For both manipulation tasks, we evaluate success rates over the initial condition and domain random-ization described in the environments from [58]. 

Quadruped. The robot is commanded to walk forward at a specified target speed until episode termination. For each evaluated model, we instantiate environments covering all combinations of parameters listed in Table X, resulting in 1080 distinct environments per model. All models are evaluated on the same fixed set of environments to ensure fair comparison. Each environment is run for a single episode, during which state-based reward is accumulated until termination. Episodes terminate either after 1000 simulation steps or upon failure, defined as body contact with the ground or violation of base orientation limits. Results are summarized in Table I, where we report the average accumulated reward per episode across all environments. TABLE IX: Real-world quadruped results for both tasks. Success is reported as successful trials out of five. Forward progress is reported as mean ±

standard deviation (meters) across trials at each commanded speed. The Pretrained model corresponds to zero-shot deployment of the simulation-trained world model. The Single-step BC policy is the behavior cloning policy used to initialize IQL and RLPD prior to finetuning. SimDist , IQL, and RLPD results reflect performance after real-world finetuning using 35.7 minutes (Slippery Slope) and 32.1 minutes (Foam) of data. RLPD results on the Foam task are not reported, as the method destabilized the robot prior to evaluation. Speed Pretrained model Single-step BC policy SimDist (ours) IQL RLPD 

m s −1 Fwd. Prog. Success Fwd. Prog. Success Fwd. Prog. Success Fwd. Prog. Success Fwd. Prog. Success Slippery 0.1 0.70 ± 0.56 0/5 1.49 ± 0.29 2/5 1.78 ± 0.08 4/5 0.00 ± 0.00 0/5 0.32 ± 0.01 0/5 Slope 0.3 0.43 ± 0.13 0/5 1.43 ± 0.25 1/5 1.82 ± 0.00 5/5 0.39 ± 0.56 0/5 0.34 ± 0.05 0/5 0.5 0.90 ± 0.40 0/5 0.62 ± 0.23 0/5 1.82 ± 0.00 5/5 0.46 ± 0.42 0/5 0.35 ± 0.01 0/5 Foam 0.2 2.98 ± 0.02 3/5 2.07 ± 1.01 1/5 3.00 ± 0.00 5/5 0.92 ± 0.48 1/5 – –0.7 2.39 ± 0.71 2/5 1.54 ± 0.81 1/5 3.00 ± 0.00 5/5 2.25 ± 0.87 2/5 – –1.2 1.70 ± 0.99 0/5 2.45 ± 0.47 2/5 3.00 ± 0.00 5/5 2.73 ± 0.34 3/5 – –

TABLE X: Parameter values used to construct quadruped ablation environ-ments in simulation. Each environment is defined by a unique combination of commanded forward speed, ground friction coefficient, terrain type, and terrain difficulty. All combinations are evaluated for each model, yielding 1080 environments per model. Terrain Speed Friction Terrain Difficulty 0.2 0.2 Boxes 0.2 0.4 0.4 Rough 0.4 0.6 0.6 Stairs Up 0.6 0.8 0.8 Stairs Down 0.8 1.0 1 Slope Up 11.2 1.2 Slope Down