Title: AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building-Grid Co-Simulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26005v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:20:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building–Grid Co-Simulation 

## Borui Zhang 

University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW, Australia borui.zhang@unsw.edu.au 

## Nariman Mahdavi 

CSIRO Newcastle, NSW, Australia Nariman.Mahdavimazdeh@csiro.au 

## Subbu Sethuvenkatraman 

CSIRO Newcastle, NSW, Australia Subbu.Sethuvenkatraman@csiro.au 

## Shuang Ao 

University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW, Australia shuang.ao@unsw.edu.au 

## Flora Salim 

University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW, Australia flora.salim@unsw.edu.au 

Abstract 

The growing availability of building operational data motivates the use of reinforcement learning (RL), which can learn control policies directly from data and cope with the complexity and uncertainty of large-scale building clusters. However, most existing simulation environments prioritize building-side performance metrics and lack systematic evaluation of grid-level impacts, while their experimen-tal workflows still rely heavily on manual configuration and sub-stantial programming expertise. Therefore, this paper proposes Au-toB2G, an automated building–grid co-simulation framework that completes the entire simulation workflow solely based on natural-language task descriptions. The framework extends CityLearn V2 to support Building-to-Grid (B2G) interaction and adopts the large language model (LLM)–based SOCIA (Simulation Orchestration for Computational Intelligence with Agents) framework to auto-matically generate, execute, and iteratively refine the simulator. As LLMs lack prior knowledge of the implementation context of sim-ulation functions, a codebase covering simulation configurations and functional modules is constructed and organized as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) to explicitly represent module dependencies and execution order, guiding the LLM to retrieve a complete exe-cutable path. Experimental results demonstrate that AutoB2G can effectively enable automated simulator implementations, coordi-nating B2G interactions to improve grid-side performance metrics. 

CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence ; Simu-lation support systems ; Multi-agent systems .

Keywords 

Building energy system, power system analysis, simulation envi-ronment, large language model, multi-agent framework  

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada
> ©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

ACM Reference Format: 

Borui Zhang, Nariman Mahdavi, Subbu Sethuvenkatraman, Shuang Ao, and Flora Salim. 2026. AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building–Grid Co-Simulation. In Proceedings of The 13th ACM International Conference on Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cities, and Transportation (BuildSys ’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

1 Introduction 

As the share of building energy consumption in total electricity demand continues to grow, research on demand response and en-ergy management at the scale of building clusters has become a key pathway for enhancing system flexibility [ 4, 16 ]. In parallel, the rapid proliferation of high-resolution operational data from smart meters, building management systems, and Internet of Things (IoT) sensors has created unprecedented opportunities for data-driven control [ 21 ]. In this context, reinforcement learning (RL)–based building control methods have attracted increasing attention, as they can directly learn control policies from data while effectively handling the complexity and uncertainty inherent in large-scale building systems [29, 31]. Several open-source simulation environments have been de-veloped to support RL-based building control research, such as BOPTES-Gym [ 1 ], Energym [ 25 ], Sinergym [ 14 ], and CityLearn [ 22 ]. However, these environments primarily emphasize building-side performance metrics such as peak demand and electricity cost, while system-level impacts on the power grid remain insufficiently explored. GridLearn [ 24 ] integrates CityLearn V1 with power flow models to optimize grid-level objectives. However, with the contin-uous expansion of CityLearn’s functionalities, such as customized dataset support, electric vehicle (EV) integration, and building ther-mal dynamics modeling, GridLearn has become incompatible with the latest version of the framework, thereby restricting its ability to exploit newly added features [ 22 ]. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a new building–grid co-simulation framework based on the latest CityLearn. Furthermore, as neural-network-based soft constraints lack the explicit guarantees provided by mathematical optimization, it is also essential to establish a multi-metric grid evaluation system for systematically assessing power system safety and resilience under RL-based control [2].  

> arXiv:2603.26005v1 [cs.AI] 27 Mar 2026 BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada Borui Zhang, Nariman Mahdavi, Subbu Sethuvenkatraman, Shuang Ao, and Flora Salim

Moreover, as simulation environments continue to evolve, users typically need to invest considerable effort in mastering frame-works and writing repetitive code [ 26 ]. An automated approach that generates executable simulation workflows, runs experiments, and collects results can substantially reduce manual workload and lower the technical barrier to entry [ 12 ]. For researchers, this al-lows greater focus on scientific questions rather than low-level implementation details. For platform developers, lowering the us-age barrier can broaden the user base and promote wider adoption of their tools. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) present new opportunities for the automation of building simulation. LLMs have demonstrated strong capabilities in natural language understanding, code generation, and workflow orchestration, enabling a paradigm shift from manually coded simulations to natural-language-driven simulations [ 9 ]. OpenCEM [ 20 ] provides an LLM-based platform for evaluating context-aware energy management algorithms with real-world data. Eplus-LLM [ 13 ] applies LLMs to automate build-ing simulation modeling in EnergyPlus. [ 3] presents X-GridAgent, an agentic LLM framework that enables language–driven auto-mated power system analysis. [ 18 ] proposes OptDisPro, an LLM-based framework that automates the coding and solution of optimal power flow (OPF) problems in distribution networks. These indicate that LLMs are increasingly transitioning from passive information-retrieval tools to automation platforms capable of supporting mod-eling, control, and evaluation across the entire simulation pipeline. Despite these advantages, natural-language-driven automated simulation based on LLMs still faces significant technical challenges [ 8, 19 ]. First, complex simulation environments typically involve multiple platforms, heterogeneous modules, and intricate interface dependencies. On the one hand, LLMs often lack sufficient relevant domain knowledge; on the other hand, as the workflow becomes longer and more complex, it is harder to maintain structural and dependency correctness. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) can augment LLMs with externally retrieved domain knowledge [15 ]. For example, [ 11 ] uses RAG to inject power-system-specific coding knowledge into an LLM-based power system simulation framework. However, for complex workflows, LLMs still struggle to ensure that retrieved components can be composed into a valid exe-cution pipeline. [ 7] models complex reasoning as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), allowing stepwise decomposition and verification to improve reasoning accuracy. Therefore, achieving reliable automa-tion for complex simulation workflows requires not only effective domain knowledge injection but also structural constraints on the retrieval process of LLMs. Second, as simulation workflows become increasingly complex, achieving reliable automatic translation from natural-language de-scriptions into fully executable programs remains challenging [ 10 ]. For such complex tasks that are difficult for a single LLM to handle in isolation, multi-agent frameworks offer a promising solution by decomposing the overall problem into more manageable sub-tasks that are addressed collaboratively by multiple specialized agents [ 17 ]. Furthermore, agentic systems are capable of reflection, offer-ing the potential to detect and correct errors in generated code [ 23 ]. [ 9] proposes SOCIA (Simulation Orchestration for Computa-tional Intelligence with Agents), a multi-agent framework that iter-atively generates, evaluates, and refines simulator implementations through interactive agent collaboration and a Textual Gradient De-scent (TGD)–based feedback mechanism. Despite these capabilities, ensuring reliable and task-specific simulator construction for build-ing–grid co-simulation under given platforms and configuration constraints remains largely unexplored. To address these challenges, we propose AutoB2G , a natural-language-driven automated building-grid co-simulation framework. Specifically, we extend the latest CityLearn V2 [ 22 ] to support Building-to-Grid (B2G) interaction, along with multiple grid-side metrics for evaluating control strategies. As shown in Figure 1, given a natural-language description of a simulation task, an agen-tic retrieval mechanism is employed to identify and retrieve relevant modules from the codebase, which are then provided to the SO-CIA framework for code generation, simulation execution, and performance evaluation. The main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• A building–grid co-simulation environment is developed to support both building control and grid-level optimization and evaluation, and is evaluated on the IEEE 33-bus distribu-tion network for RL-based voltage control. The framework supports full-process simulation automation through natural language, thereby substantially reducing manual interven-tion and domain expertise requirements. 

• A DAG-based agentic retrieval mechanism is proposed, in which an agent retrieves functional modules from a DAG-structured codebase to acquire domain knowledge. By explic-itly encoding module dependencies and execution order, the DAG enables agent comprehension and supports systematic validation and repair, enhancing the workflow completeness and structural consistency. 

• The SOCIA framework is employed to automatically con-struct, execute, and evaluate the building-grid simulator, with multiple agents responsible for workflow management, code generation, simulation execution, result evaluation, and feedback generation. A TGD-based feedback mechanism is used to iteratively detect and correct program errors and inconsistencies, thereby improving simulation reliability. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the simulation framework, Section 3 presents the DAG-based agentic retrieval mechanism, and Section 4 describes the SOCIA framework. Section 5 reports the experimental results, fol-lowed by discussions of limitations and future work in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper. 

2 Simulation Framework 

To investigate the impact of demand-side control strategies in urban building clusters on the operational security and resilience of distri-bution networks, we first extend CityLearn V2 from building-only simulation to building–grid co-simulation for grid-level optimiza-tion and evaluation. The simulation workflow is organized as a DAG-structured codebase, from which an agent can structurally retrieve functional modules to configure simulations according to user-specified requirements. Table 1 summarizes the functional components of the codebase. Finally, the SOCIA framework is em-ployed to construct, execute, and evaluate the generated simulator. Overall, the framework takes a natural-language task description as AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building–Grid Co-Simulation BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada 

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed study. 

the sole input and produces a complete simulation program along with the corresponding simulation results as output. 

Table 1: Codebase overview. Function Category Primary Purpose Platform 

Building data generation Physics-based building simula-tion driven by specified building archetypes and climate scenarios, used to generate building-level datasets. EnergyPlus Building-grid co-simulation Configuration of the CityLearn environment, definition of re-ward functions, training of con-trol agents, grid network configu-ration, and simulation execution. CityLearn+ Pandapower Power system analysis Quantitative assessment of net-work operating margins and se-curity constraints under building strategies. Pandapower Result man-agement and visualization Structured storage, aggregation, and visualization of simulation outcomes. Pandas+ Matplotlib 

2.1 Building Data Generation 

EnergyPlus [ 5 ] is a high-fidelity building energy simulation engine widely used for modeling thermal dynamics, HVAC systems, and energy consumption. In CityLearn V1 [ 28 ], building thermal dy-namics are approximated using fixed parameters, and simulations are limited to predefined datasets. By contrast, CityLearn V2 ad-ditionally supports the generation of custom residential datasets using the End-Use Load Profiles for the U.S. Building Stock dataset [ 30 ]. Furthermore, CityLearn V2 uses EnergyPlus simulations in combination with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models to approximate building thermal dynamics. Consequently, CityLearn V2 provides a more realistic and data-rich simulation environment, making it a necessary choice for this study. Within our framework, users can request the generation of build-ing datasets under alternative climate conditions, geographic lo-cations, or building configurations. In such cases, EnergyPlus is invoked to perform detailed building simulations and produce time-series electricity demand along with auxiliary thermal variables (e.g., indoor temperature and heating/cooling loads). These outputs are subsequently post-processed and converted into standardized formats compatible with CityLearn. When no customization is re-quested, the framework defaults to the built-in CityLearn datasets, thereby avoiding unnecessary computational overhead. 

2.2 Building-Grid Co-Simulation 

Our framework integrates CityLearn V2 with a Pandapower [ 27 ]-based grid model to enable building–grid co-simulation. At each simulation step, the aggregated building-level electricity demand generated by CityLearn is mapped to corresponding load buses in the Pandapower network, where power flow analysis is performed to compute grid operating states. To enable grid-aware decision-making, grid-related variables, such as bus voltage magnitudes, are incorporated into the observa-tion space provided to the agent. Building control actions are first executed within CityLearn to update building states and electricity demand. The resulting loads are then passed to the Pandapower model for grid simulation, and the computed grid states are fed BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada Borui Zhang, Nariman Mahdavi, Subbu Sethuvenkatraman, Shuang Ao, and Flora Salim 

back to the CityLearn environment as part of the subsequent ob-servations. In addition, the reward function can explicitly account for power system performance. For example, a centralized reward can be defined to penalize voltage deviations across the network: 

𝑟 𝑡 = 1

|B| ∑︁ 𝑖 ∈ B 

n

𝑉 ref − 𝛼 𝑖 (𝑉 𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑉 ref )2 o

(1) where B denotes the set of buses, 𝑉 𝑖,𝑡 is the voltage magnitude at bus 𝑖 at time 𝑡 , 𝑉 ref is the nominal voltage, and 𝛼 𝑖 is a scaling factor introduced to keep the reward approximately normalized. Within our framework, users can flexibly select different control paradigms, such as rule-based controllers and RL–based controllers. For RL-based approaches, both centralized and decentralized con-trol architectures are supported, and agents can be trained for a user-specified number of episodes. Users may also choose among different reward formulations, such as building-oriented rewards that focus on building performance, and grid-aware rewards that explicitly account for power system metrics. In addition, the frame-work supports configurable grid topologies and network settings, allowing users to modify network components to study the impact of different grid configurations on control performance. Once the simulation is completed, building behavior trajectories are recorded, and performance indicators provided by CityLearn (e.g., energy cost, emissions, and comfort metrics) can be reported. 

2.3 Power System Analysis 

As discussed earlier, while CityLearn provides a rich set of building-side performance metrics, it lacks a systematic evaluation of grid-side performance. Therefore, beyond incorporating grid dynamics during the simulation stage, we further introduce grid-side eval-uation metrics in the assessment stage to quantify the impacts of building control strategies on power system operation. More specifically, the implemented metrics consist of the follow-ing components: 

• Voltage admissibility. Steady-state power flow calculations are used to determine bus voltage magnitudes under time-varying operating conditions. System operation is considered admissible when 

𝑉 min ≤ 𝑉 𝑖 ≤ 𝑉 max (2) where 𝑉 𝑖 denotes the per-unit voltage magnitude at bus 𝑖 .Violations of (2) indicate potential under- or over-voltage risks. 

• Thermal loading limits. Branch loading is evaluated si-multaneously, and the apparent power flowing through each line must satisfy 

𝑆 line ,𝑘 ≤ 𝑆 max  

> 𝑘

(3) where 𝑆 line ,𝑘 is the apparent power through line 𝑘 and 𝑆 max  

> 𝑘

is its thermal rating. Exceeding (3) signals possible overloading conditions. 

• N–1 resilience. The N–1 criterion evaluates whether the system can continue operating securely after the unexpected outage of any single line or critical component. For each con-tingency, the affected element is removed from service and a new power-flow calculation is performed under the same op-erating conditions. Contingencies that result in divergence or violation of network limits are classified as unsafe, and the total number of such cases 𝑅 𝑁 −1 serves as a time-varying indicator of system resilience. 

• Short-circuit current. Fault currents are analysed using an equivalent Thévenin representation. Let the network seen from the faulted bus be characterised by the Thévenin impedance 𝑍 th = 𝑅 th + 𝑗𝑋 th , the initial symmetrical short-circuit current is then approximated as 

𝐼 𝑘𝑠𝑠 = 𝑈 nom 

√3 𝑍 th 

= 𝑈 nom 

√3 (𝑅 th + 𝑗𝑋 th ) (4) where 𝑈 nom is the nominal line-to-line voltage, and 𝑅 th , 𝑋 th 

are the equivalent Thévenin resistance and reactance at the faulted bus, respectively. This indicator evaluates whether demand-side control strategies increase fault-current magni-tudes to levels that may compromise protection coordination. After the simulation, the framework can compute, store, or visu-alize the specified performance metrics according to user-specified requirements. 

3 DAG-Based Agentic Retrieval 3.1 DAG Modeling 

For the co-simulation tasks considered in this work, heterogeneous functional modules correspond to different logical stages. Across different tasks, the selection of modules, their parameter config-urations, and even their internal behaviors may vary. Moreover, LLMs do not possess prior knowledge of the simulation workflow of specific environments. Therefore, we construct a codebase orga-nized as a DAG, which covers simulation configurations, interaction logic, and execution modules, to provide structured guidance for LLM-based workflow generation. The DAG explicitly encodes inter-module dependencies and execution order, facilitating the agent’s understanding and retrieval of appropriate modules. When the retrieved modules fail to form a valid DAG, the agent is further invoked to repair the workflow and ensure executability. Let the set of callable simulation functions in the codebase be 

F = {𝑓 1, 𝑓 2, . . . , 𝑓 𝑛 } (5) Based on their input–output relationships, we construct a DAG 

G = (V , E) , where V = F and (𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) ∈ E indicates that 𝑓 𝑗 

requires one or more outputs produced by 𝑓 𝑖 . Each node 𝑓 𝑖 ∈ V is associated with a set of attributes as follows: (1) its input interfaces; (2) its output interfaces; (3) its corresponding stage in the DAG; (4) its requirement status (mandatory or optional); and (5) a natural-language description of its functionality and contextual role within the DAG. Therefore, a candidate execution sequence can be written as 

𝑆 = (𝑓 𝑖 1 , 𝑓 𝑖 2 , . . . , 𝑓 𝑖 𝑘 ) (6) where 𝑖 𝑝 denotes the index of the function executed at position 𝑝 

in the sequence. The sequence is constrained by the topological ordering rule 

(𝑓 𝑖 𝑝 , 𝑓 𝑖 𝑞 ) ∈ E ⇒ 𝑝 < 𝑞 (7) AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building–Grid Co-Simulation BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada 

This reformulates the problem from directly executing a prede-fined script to planning a valid execution sequence under explicit dependency constraints. 

3.2 Agentic Retrieval 

To satisfy user-specified simulation tasks, we introduce an LLM-based agent that interprets natural-language objectives and re-trieves relevant modules from the codebase. Rather than exposing the agent to the entire raw source code, we present the DAG for-mulation, which explicitly encodes functional dependencies and allows clearer structural reasoning. Given a natural-language task description 𝑈 , the agent returns a set of candidate functions, 

𝑆 = ΦLLM (𝑈 ), 𝑆 ⊆ F (8) where ΦLLM (·) denotes the agent’s reasoning process that identifies candidate functions for pipeline construction. Since the set 𝑆 may omit prerequisite components, a DAG valida-tor checks 𝑆 𝑡 and returns structured feedback Δ𝑡 , capturing missing dependencies and violated constraints. The agent then refines its proposal according to 

𝑆 𝑡 +1 = ΦLLM 

 𝑈 , 𝑆 𝑡 , Δ𝑡 

 (9) where the feedback term Δ𝑡 encodes the reasons for failure in the previous iteration. This process repeats until no structural viola-tions are detected. In this way, the DAG not only represents struc-tural constraints but also acts as an iterative repair mechanism. Once a validated set of functions 𝑆 ∗ has been obtained, the cor-responding source codes are extracted from the codebase to form a template Θ(𝑆 ∗). Then, the new code can be generated by using the retrieved template as a structural reference rather than syn-thesizing programs from scratch. As a consequence, the generated solution preserves the intended modular architecture, and remains consistent with declared dependencies and execution. 

4 SOCIA Framework 4.1 Framework Overview 

SOCIA is an LLM-based multi-agent framework designed to auto-mate the construction of executable simulators. Instead of relying on manually engineered implementations or one-shot code genera-tion, SOCIA treats the simulator program itself as an optimization variable and improves it through iterative generation, execution, verification, and repair. Given a task description 𝑈 and a template Θ, SOCIA first synthe-sizes an initial runnable program. During execution, the framework monitors compilation status, interface conformance, runtime sta-bility, and structural completeness. Whenever violations or failures are detected, SOCIA converts these issues into structured feedback that drives localized code repair. Through repeated iterations, the framework converges to an executable simulator implementation. 

4.2 Agent Roles 

SOCIA achieves end-to-end automation through role-specialized agents coordinated by a Workflow Manager . As shown in Table 2, each agent is responsible for one stage of the pipeline, and together they form a closed-loop execution process. 

Table 2: Roles and responsibilities in SOCIA framework Agent Role Responsibilities 

Workflow Manager 

Coordinates the orchestration process, controls forward execution and backward repair cycles, determines agent invocation order, and decides termination based on convergence criteria. 

Code Generator Synthesizes the initial simulator program ac-cording to the task description, and subse-quently performs patch-based refinement. The agent also includes self-check and self-repair to improve robustness. 

Simulation Executor 

Compiles and executes the current code version, recording simulation outputs, logs, exceptions, and execution metadata. 

Result Evaluator 

Checks structural and functional consistency, identifies missing modules, interface mis-matches, incorrect formats, and runtime fail-ures, and represents them as constraint viola-tions. 

Feedback Generator 

Analyzes logs and violations, aggregates his-torical repair traces, and generates structured natural-language feedback describing failure causes, affected modules, and correction sug-gestions. These agents jointly implement an iterative cycle of automatic synthesis, execution monitoring, violation detection, and targeted repair, allowing SOCIA to progressively improve simulator quality with minimal human involvement. 

4.3 Textual-Gradient Descent 

In this work, SOCIA adopts TGD as its core mechanism for auto-matic code refinement. TGD extends the idea of gradient-based optimization to the program space by treating the simulator code itself as the optimization variable. Instead of adjusting numeric pa-rameters, SOCIA iteratively improves executable programs through a cycle of execution, constraint checking, and targeted repair. First, let 𝑥 ∈ X denote the current simulator implementation of Code Generator , where X represents the space of all candidate programs. Then we define the feasible set as 

𝐶 = {𝑥 | 𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 ) ≤ 0, 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 } (10) where each constraint function 𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 ) encodes a system requirement such as syntactic validity, successful compilation, and interface consistency. Then, the optimization objective can be formulated as follows: 

min   

> 𝑥 ∈ X

𝐿 (𝑥 ) s.t. 𝑥 ∈ 𝐶 (11) with the loss function defined as 

𝐿 (𝑥 ) =∑︁ 

> 𝑖

max (0, 𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 )) (12) BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada Borui Zhang, Nariman Mahdavi, Subbu Sethuvenkatraman, Shuang Ao, and Flora Salim 

This formulation assigns zero loss to fully compliant programs and penalizes any violation of the specified constraints. Conceptually, SOCIA aims to push the program into the feasible region 𝐶 and maintain feasibility throughout the optimization process. At iteration 𝑡 , the framework evaluates the current code 𝑥 𝑡 by in-voking the Simulation Executor , which performs a suite of static and dynamic checks, including compilation tests, interface validation, and minimal trial runs, producing a set of execution results denoted as R𝑡 . Based on R𝑡 , the Result Evaluator derives the constraint evaluations {𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑡 )} and the corresponding loss value 𝐿 𝑡 = 𝐿 (𝑥 𝑡 ).Rather than computing numeric gradients, SOCIA relies on the 

Feedback Generator to produce a textual gradient that serves as the backward signal for code refinement: 

𝑔 𝑡 ≜ 𝜕𝐿 𝑡 

𝜕𝑥 𝑡 

= ∇LLM (𝑥 𝑡 , {𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑡 )}) (13) Here, ∇LLM (·) denotes an LLM-driven transformation implemented by the feedback agent, which converts constraint violations into structured natural-language repair directives. The resulting tex-tual gradient explicitly identifies the violated constraints, locates the code segments or functional modules responsible for the vio-lations, and provides minimal corrective suggestions, such as in-serting missing function calls, correcting interface parameters, or completing absent logic. Through this mechanism, SOCIA directly aligns constraint-induced loss signals with executable program modifications, realizing a loss-aligned but non-numeric form of backpropagation. Given the textual gradient 𝑔 𝑡 , Code Generator performs a code update via a patching step: 

e𝑥 𝑡 +1 = ΨTGD (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑔 𝑡 ) (14) where ΨTGD (·) denotes the program synthesis and editing operation conditioned on the current code and the generated textual feedback. The output e𝑥 𝑡 +1 represents a repaired but not yet verified candidate program. Since textual updates may introduce new violations, Code Gen-erator applies a projection operator to enforce feasibility: 

𝑥 𝑡 +1 = Π𝐶 (e𝑥 𝑡 +1) (15) The projection operator Π𝐶 corresponds to a sequence of self-validation and self-repair procedures, including syntax checking, recompilation, interface correction, and minimal corrective edits. The goal of projection is to restore feasibility with the smallest necessary modifications, ensuring that each iteration yields an exe-cutable and constraint-compliant program. By repeating the above process, SOCIA produces a sequence of programs which converges to a final implementation 𝑥 ∗. The resulting program satisfies all specified engineering constraints and can be executed without manual debugging. Algorithm 1 summa-rizes the overall automated workflow from a natural-language task description to an executable simulator implementation. 

5 Experiments 5.1 Experimental Setup 

The experimental evaluation is conducted on a set of natural-language-driven simulation tasks. To reflect varying levels of automation difficulty, the tasks are categorized into three complexity levels: 

Algorithm 1: Implementation of the AutoB2G Framework 

Input: Natural-language task description 𝑈 ;DAG-based codebase G = (V , E) ;Maximum DAG repair rounds 𝑇 DAG ;Maximum SOCIA optimization rounds 𝑇 SOCIA 

Output: Simulator implementation 𝑥 ∗ 

> 1

Initialization:  

> 2

Workflow Manager receives task 𝑈 ; 

> 3

𝑆 0 ← ΦRetriever LLM (𝑈 ); // Codebase Retriever  

> 4

𝑡 ← 0; 

> 5

for 𝑡 = 0 to 𝑇 DAG − 1 do  

> 6

Δ𝑡 ← Validator (𝑆 𝑡 , G) ; 

> 7

if Δ𝑡 = ∅ then  

> 8

break ; 

> 9

end  

> 10

𝑆 𝑡 +1 ← ΦRetriever LLM (𝑈 , 𝑆 𝑡 , Δ𝑡 ); // Codebase Retriever  

> 11

end  

> 12

Θ ← ExtractTemplate (𝑆 𝑡 ); 

> 13

𝑥 0 ← ΦCodeGen LLM (𝑈 , Θ); // Code Generator  

> 14

𝑡 ← 0; 

> 15

for 𝑡 = 0 to 𝑇 SOCIA − 1 do  

> 16

R𝑡 ← ΦExecutor LLM (𝑥 𝑡 ); // Simulation Executor  

> 17

{𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑡 )} ← ΦEvaluator LLM (𝑥 𝑡 , R𝑡 ); // Result Evaluator  

> 18

𝐿 𝑡 ← Í𝑖 max (0, 𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑡 )) ; 

> 19

if 𝐿 𝑡 = 0 then  

> 20

return 𝑥 𝑡 ; 

> 21

end  

> 22

𝑔 𝑡 ← ΦFeedback LLM (𝑥 𝑡 , {𝑐 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑡 )} , R𝑡 ); // Feedback Generator  

> 23

˜𝑥 𝑡 +1 ← ΦCodeGen LLM (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑔 𝑡 ); // Code Generator  

> 24

𝑥 𝑡 +1 ← Π𝐶 ( ˜𝑥 𝑡 +1); // Code Generator  

> 25

end 

• Simple tasks : Simple tasks correspond to single-stage sim-ulation workflows with minimal code composition. 

Example: “Run a building simulation using a rule-based con-trol strategy on the default dataset, and report the KPIs.” 

• Medium tasks : Medium tasks require multi-stage work-flows that involve model training and subsequent evaluation, demanding coordinated invocation of multiple modules and correct data flow between simulation stages. 

Example: “Train a SAC model for 10 episodes using CityLearn’s default reward function, and evaluate its performance on the IEEE 33-bus system with 12 buildings at each node. Save the bus voltage and line loading data.” 

• Complex tasks : Complex tasks involve complex multi-stage workflows with data preparation, policy training, and diverse evaluation metrics specified by user requirements, imposing higher demands on module correctness, dependency man-agement, and result organization. 

Example: “Compare the centralized and decentralized build-ing control policies from both the building-side and grid-side perspectives. Use the SAC model trained for 10 episodes, with a quadratic reward that minimizes voltage deviations. Test AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building–Grid Co-Simulation BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada 

the resulting strategy on an IEEE 33-bus distribution network with 24 buildings connected at each node. Add a reactive power shunt element at bus 14 that injects -1.2 MVAr. Compute grid-side metrics, including bus voltage magnitudes, line loadings, and an N-1 contingency analysis using a voltage tolerance of 0.05 p.u. and a line loading threshold of 70%. Output the results as both plots and CSV files.” 

To ensure a fair comparison, all methods are tested using the Ope-nAI GPT-5 API under the same experimental setup. 

5.2 Task Performance Comparison 

To evaluate the performance of the proposed methods in natural-language-driven automated simulation, four configurations are compared: LLM (a single LLM without retrieval), LLM + AR (a sin-gle LLM with agentic retrieval), SOCIA (SOCIA without retrieval), and SOCIA + AR (SOCIA with agentic retrieval). Since LLMs do not inherently possess task-specific codebase knowledge, providing access to the full codebase is necessary in all configurations. Here, without retrieval refers to supplying the entire codebase directly to the model, whereas with agentic retrieval denotes selectively retrieving and providing the relevant modules. 

5.2.1 Evaluation Metrics. Performance is evaluated using two met-rics: the average task success rate and the average code score. The task success rate serves as the primary metric, indicating whether a task is successfully completed; however, it cannot reflect the re-minders in the structural correctness or completeness of the gener-ated simulation workflows. Therefore, the code score is introduced as a complementary metric to quantify the accuracy of the gen-erated code by measuring how many required components and configurations are correctly produced. Specifically, the code score is defined as Code Score = 𝑁 correct 

𝑁 total + 𝑁 extra 

(16) where 𝑁 correct denotes the number of correctly implemented re-quired components, 𝑁 total denotes the total number of required components, and 𝑁 extra denotes the number of unnecessary com-ponents generated beyond the specified requirements. 

5.2.2 Task Success Rate Performance. Table 3 reports the task suc-cess rate across different task complexity levels. In simple tasks, all four methods achieve relatively high success rates. The success rate of the LLM reaches 0.90, while SOCIA + AR achieves a per-fect score of 1.00, indicating that when functional requirements are limited and dependency structures are relatively simple, most methods are capable of generating executable code. As task complexity increases to the medium level, the success rate of the LLM decreases from 0.90 to 0.77, suggesting that the model begins to struggle with more complex environment configu-rations and analysis workflows. In contrast, SOCIA + AR maintains a high success rate of 0.93. In complex tasks, the difficulty further increases due to the need to correctly configure a large number of in-terdependent components, such as multi-stage simulation pipelines and comparative analyses across different methods. Under these conditions, the success rate of the LLM drops substantially to 0.53. By contrast, SOCIA + AR continues to achieve a success rate of 0.83. The result indicates that SOCIA’s multi-agent architecture en-ables more reliable generation and refinement through multi-stage understanding and feedback mechanisms, thereby enhancing code accuracy in complex scenarios. 

Table 3: Success rate across task complexity levels Method Simple Tasks Medium Tasks Complex Tasks                                     

> LLM 0.90 ±0.08 0.77 ±0.12 0.53 ±0.19
> SOCIA 0.93 ±0.09 0.83 ±0.12 0.73 ±0.09
> LLM + AR 0.97 ±0.05 0.80 ±0.08 0.67 ±0.05
> SOCIA + AR 1.00 ±0.00 0.93 ±0.09 0.83 ±0.05

5.2.3 Code Score Performance. Table 4 presents the code score across different task complexity levels. In simple tasks, although the LLM achieves a relatively high success rate (0.90), its corre-sponding code score is only 0.69, which is significantly lower than that of SOCIA (0.82), LLM + AR (0.72) and SOCIA + AR (1.00). This discrepancy arises because, in simple tasks, directly providing the full codebase to the model tends to induce the inclusion of redundant modules. Although the model successfully completes the task objectives, it often generates additional components or configurations that are not explicitly specified in the requirements, resulting in a lower overall score. In practical applications, such redundancy may not affect simulation outputs themselves, but it can negatively impact users’ ability to perform deeper inspection and analysis of the generated code. For medium-level tasks, the relationship between success rate and code score begins to change. As the number of required func-tional modules and configuration items increases, the introduction of redundant components is reduced. The LLM ’s code score (0.66) remains close to that observed in simple tasks, while its success rate decreases, indicating increasing difficulty in correctly selecting, us-ing, and configuring the required components. In contrast, SOCIA + AR maintains both a high code score (0.84) and a high success rate, demonstrating that agentic retrieval effectively mitigates the increased information retrieval burden associated with larger task scopes and helps preserve configuration consistency. In complex tasks, the code score further highlights the perfor-mance gap between methods. The LLM achieves a score of only 0.44, reflecting frequent failures in correctly implementing all re-quired components. By contrast, SOCIA + AR attains a substan-tially higher score of 0.88. This result highlights the importance of agentic retrieval in reducing irrelevant information and introducing correct components and configurations as reliable grounding for code generation. 

Table 4: Code score across task complexity levels Method Simple Tasks Medium Tasks Complex Tasks                                      

> LLM 0.69 ±0.08 0.66 ±0.05 0.44 ±0.08
> SOCIA 0.82 ±0.14 0.78 ±0.05 0.67 ±0.09
> LLM + AR 0.72 ±0.08 0.74 ±0.07 0.73 ±0.13
> SOCIA + AR 1.00 ±0.00 0.84 ±0.07 0.88 ±0.09 BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada Borui Zhang, Nariman Mahdavi, Subbu Sethuvenkatraman, Shuang Ao, and Flora Salim

5.2.4 Discussion on Failure Cases. Although the proposed method achieves higher performance than the baseline methods, a non-negligible proportion of failure cases still remains. First, the primary reason lies in the high degree of coupling among cross-module de-pendencies. Multiple components must be correctly configured and coordinated under strict execution orders, parameter constraints, and dependencies. In some failure cases, even when all key modules are correctly introduced, subtle inconsistencies in configurations or execution order can still prevent the overall simulation pipeline from completing successfully. Second, natural language instruc-tions themselves often exhibit a certain degree of ambiguity. Some tasks rely on implicit assumptions or conditions that are not ex-plicitly stated in the user instructions. Under such circumstances, the model may introduce additional components or unnecessary operations when inferring user intent, which can cause the pipeline to fail. 

5.3 Evaluation on TGD 

5.3.1 Analysis of TGD Mechanism. To illustrate how errors are handled during the simulation and to clarify the role of the TGD mechanism, we analyze a complete SOCIA iteration decision log. This analysis covers the iteration reason, convergence assessment, next iteration focus and agent adjustments, as shown in Figure 2. At the initial iteration, the system identifies a configuration error in which a reactive power compensation element is incorrectly placed. This violation is explicitly flagged as having a material impact on the simulation results. As a result, SOCIA determines that the current program has not yet converged and triggers an additional iteration. From the convergence assessment perspective, the initial version receives scores of 0.7, 0.5, and 0.55 for code quality, model accuracy, and overall convergence, respectively. These values indicate that, while the system is already executable, it does not yet satisfy the key requirements. During the subsequent TGD step, SOCIA converts the detected violation into structured repair signals and identifies the primary focus for the next iteration. In particular, the feedback generated not only identifies the incorrect shunt placement and parameter settings, but also recommends several coding improvements, such as adding post-load assertions to verify correct bus attachment and reactive power injection, as well as incorporating exception handling and logging around pp.runpp to ensure execution under non-convergence. It is worth noting that TGD is not applied only to the Code Gen-erator . Instead, it operates across multiple stages of the workflow, including task understanding, code generation, code verification, simulation execution, and result evaluation. Through this process, TGD propagates detected violations into coordinated updates across these stages, guiding the system toward a simulator implementation that satisfies the specified task requirements. 

5.3.2 Impact of TGD on Task Performance. Figure 3 illustrates the success rates across task complexity levels over iterations. A sub-stantial improvement is observed after the first iteration, indicating that a large fraction of previously failing cases are successfully re-paired and pass the evaluation criteria. As the number of iterations increases, the rate of improvement gradually decreases, suggest-ing that simpler errors are resolved early in the process, and more complex errors remain across later iterations. This trend is further reflected across different task complexity levels, where tasks of higher complexity exhibit slower convergence compared to simpler ones. Overall, TGD can propagate strategy adjustment feedback to the agents for coordinated error correction, thereby effectively driving convergence. 

5.4 Simulation Results 

5.4.1 Platform Comparison. Table 5 compares CityLearn V1, CityLearn V2, GridLearn, and the proposed AutoB2G framework. As shown in the table, AutoB2G introduces a natural-language-driven simula-tion configuration mechanism and provides more comprehensive support for both building-side and grid-side simulations. 

Table 5: Comparison of simulation platforms Feature CityLearn V1 CityLearn V2 GridLearn AutoB2G                                 

> Configuration Manual Manual Manual Natural language Building model Yes Yes Yes Yes Grid model No No Yes Yes Voltage Control No No Yes Yes Customized dataset No Yes No Yes EV integration No Yes No Yes Thermal dynamics No Yes No Yes Occupant behavior No Yes No Yes

For experimental evaluation, AutoB2G is assessed under simula-tion settings that are nearly identical to those used in GridLearn. Specifically, the experiments adopt the same IEEE 33-bus distribu-tion network topology [ 6] and voltage control objectives. Similarly, a building replication-based simplification approach is employed to scale up the system while reducing computational burden. How-ever, if computational resources and datasets are sufficient, only minor modifications to the building–node mapping are required. Under these configurations, both baseline control strategies and RL–based strategies are executed. It is worth noting that these ex-periments aim to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework through the consistency of simulation results (e.g., bus voltage dynamics and voltage magnitude distributions) under com-parable simulation settings, rather than through direct numerical comparisons, due to differences in CityLearn versions. 

5.4.2 Grid-side Performance Evaluation. Figure 4 illustrates the voltage dynamics of the distribution network under both baseline and RL-based control strategies. Under the RL setting, the controller coordinates building-level control actions with grid constraints, enabling flexible demand responses from buildings while effectively regulating bus voltages. maintaining them close to the nominal value of 1.0 p.u.. Figure 5 further presents the distribution of voltage magnitudes under the two control strategies. In the baseline case, voltage magni-tudes exhibit a much wider spread, ranging approximately from 1.0 

± 0.4 p.u., with a pronounced concentration near 1.3 p.u., reflecting frequent over-voltage conditions. In contrast, the RL-based control shifts the overall voltage distribution toward the nominal value and significantly narrows its spread, indicating that the RL agent has learned effective control strategies to mitigate voltage deviations and enhance overall voltage stability. The resulting distribution is consistent with results reported in GridLearn, demonstrating AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building–Grid Co-Simulation BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada {

"continue" : true ,

"reason" : "There is a critical configuration error (shunt placed at bus 12 instead of bus 13 

with -1.6 MVAr) that violates the specification and can materially affect grid results. Minor 

issues in imports and error handling should also be addressed. We are only at iteration 1 of 

3, so there is clear potential for significant improvement with another iteration ." ,

"convergence_assessment ": { 

"code_quality ": 0.7 ,

"model_accuracy ": 0.5 ,

"overall_convergence ": 0.55 

}, 

"next_iteration_focus ": { 

"primary_focus ": "both" ,

"specific_areas ": [ 

"Fix shunt placement to bus index 13 with q_mvar = -1.6 and verify after network load." ,

"Guard or correctly import build_neighborhood_schema ; only reference if neighborhoods are 

enabled." ,

"Add try/except around pp.runpp in run_grid with logging/recording of non -convergence to allow 

continuation." ,

"Optional: Optimize N -1 analysis by toggling in_service instead of deep -copying the network." ,

"Remove redundant 'pass' statements from implemented functions." ,

"Add a unit/assertion check post -load to confirm the shunt exists at the correct bus and 

magnitude." ,

"Re -run verification tests and N -1 analysis to confirm compliance." 

]

}, 

"agent_adjustments ": { 

"task_understanding ": { 

"adjust" : true ,

"adjustments" : "Reaffirm the explicit requirement: inject -1.6 MVAr reactive 

power via a shunt at bus index 13. Capture this as a hard validation step in the 

design spec to prevent off -by -one errors." 

}, 

"code_generation ": { 

"adjust" : true ,

"adjustments" : "Apply the code patch to set pp.create_shunt (net, bus=13, 

q_mvar =-1.6, p_mw =0.0). Wrap pp.runpp in try/except in run_grid with logging and 

safe continuation. Guard the build_neighborhood_schema reference behind a 

feature flag or remove it if unused. Remove redundant 'pass' statements." 

}, 

"code_verification ": { 

"adjust" : true ,

"adjustments" : "Add an assertion/unit test after load_network that checks 

exactly one shunt exists at bus 13 with q_mvar \u2248 -1.6. Extend static checks 

to flag undefined references when feature flags are toggled. Re -run 

implementation and error handling checks." 

}, 

"simulation_execution ": { 

"adjust" : true ,

"adjustments" : "Re -run centralized and decentralized SAC with the corrected 

grid. Ensure non -convergent steps are logged and skipped while preserving 

outputs. Optionally benchmark the N -1 loop with in_service toggling to confirm 

performance gains." 

}, 

"result_evaluation ": { 

"adjust" : true ,

"adjustments" : "Confirm voltage and line loading metrics meet tolerances post -

fix. Validate N -1 constraint reporting across all timesteps. Compare results 

against baseline to ensure the shunt change produces expected voltage support." 

}, 

"feedback_generation ": { 

"adjust" : true ,

"adjustments" : "Provide explicit patch instructions: change bus index to 13 and 

q_mvar to -1.6. Note the guard for build_neighborhood_schema . Summarize any non -

convergent steps and their impact after re -run." 

}

}, 

"human_feedback ": "No user feedback provided" 

}

Iteration Reason 

Convergence 

Assessment 

Next Iteration 

Focu s

Agent Adjustments 

Iteration 2Iteration 1

Runtime 

Outcomes 

Decision: 

Continue SOCIA 

Runtime 

Outcomes 

Decision: 

Converged SOCIA 

Textual - Gradient Descent 

Figure 2: Example of SOCIA iteration decision log for TGD. 0 1 2 3

Iteration 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

1.2 

> Success Rate

Simple Tasks Medium Tasks Complex Tasks 

Figure 3: Success rates across task complexity levels over iterations. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 

Time step (hour) 

0.96 

0.98 

1.00 

1.02 

1.04 

1.06 

> Voltage (p.u.)

Baseline 

RL 

Figure 4: Voltage dynamics under baseline and RL control. 

that AutoB2G achieves effective grid-side optimization built on CityLearn V2. 0.96 0.98 1.00 1.02 1.04 

Voltage (p.u.) 

0.00 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.20 

0.25 

> Frequency

Baseline 

RL 

Figure 5: Voltage magnitude distribution under baseline and RL control. 

5.4.3 Building Control Strategies under Different Grid Conditions. 

To further examine how the building control strategy adapts to different grid conditions, we evaluate the distribution of building net load under both over-voltage and under-voltage conditions as shown in Table 6. Under the over-voltage scenario, the uncontrolled case shows a high proportion of operating points around the [− 1, 3) kW inter-val. With control enabled, the net load distribution shifts toward higher positive load levels, reflecting the controller’s tendency to increase flexible building demand to mitigate voltage rise. Under the under-voltage scenario, the uncontrolled case exhibits a relatively dispersed net load distribution, with occasional extreme spikes at higher load levels. In contrast, the controlled strategy concentrates the net load distribution around the [− 1, 1) kW interval, indicating effective load reduction to alleviate voltage drops. Overall, these BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada Borui Zhang, Nariman Mahdavi, Subbu Sethuvenkatraman, Shuang Ao, and Flora Salim 

results demonstrate that the building control strategy adapts its load modulation behavior to grid conditions, thereby supporting voltage regulation at the grid level. 

Table 6: Building net load distribution under over- and under-voltage conditions. Over-voltage Under-voltage Interval (kW) Uncontrolled Controlled Uncontrolled Controlled 

[− 3, −1) 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 

[− 1, 1) 41.0% 9.4% 54.4% 74.3% 

[1, 3) 49.7% 76.3% 41.1% 23.8% 

[3, 5) 7.2% 11.9% 2.8% 0.7% 

[5, 7) 1.1% 1.5% 0.4% 0.1% 

[7, 9) 1.0% 0.6% 0.6% 1.1% 

[9, 11 ) 0.0% 0.3% 0.7% 0.0% 

[11 , 13 ) 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 

6 Future Work and Limitations 

The main limitation of this work is that the proposed AutoB2G framework has so far been implemented and validated within a limited set of platforms, interfaces, and experimental settings. In particular, the current evaluation is conducted on CityLearn and Pandapower, and does not yet explore a broader spectrum of simu-lator combinations, interface standards, or control methods. As a result, while the experiments demonstrate the feasibility and effec-tiveness of the automated pipeline in the considered environment, the robustness of the framework under more heterogeneous sim-ulation systems and diverse application scenarios remains to be systematically assessed. Despite these limitations, AutoB2G is inherently extensible by design. Future work will expand the framework along several di-mensions. First, at the platform level, we plan to integrate additional building and power-system simulation tools to evaluate the adapt-ability of the framework across diverse simulation environments. Second, at the functional level, we will enhance configuration and orchestration capabilities to better support customizable simulation design, including richer configuration interfaces, reusable func-tional modules, scenario definitions, and evaluation metrics, thereby reducing manual effort and allowing users to focus on high-level research objectives rather than low-level implementation details. Through these extensions, the proposed framework is expected to provide more general and practically applicable support for natural-language-driven building-grid co-simulation, and to en-courage further investigation into the role of LLMs in simulation automation. 

7 Conclusion 

This paper presents AutoB2G, a natural-language-driven automated building–grid co-simulation framework that integrates building control simulation with grid-level optimization and evaluation. By leveraging the SOCIA framework with agentic retrieval and TGD, the proposed approach enables end-to-end automation of the simulation pipeline from natural-language task descriptions, substantially reducing manual configuration effort. Experimental results demonstrate that the framework can effectively produce reliable simulator implementations, while coordinating buildings to improve grid-side performance metrics. 

References 

[1] Javier Arroyo, Carlo Manna, Fred Spiessens, Lieve Helsen, D Saelens, J Laverge, W Boydens, and L Helsen. 2022. An OpenAI-gym environment for the building optimization testing (BOPTEST) framework. In Proceedings of Building Simula-tion 2021: 17th Conference of IBPSA , Vol. 17. INT BUILDING PERFORMANCE SIMULATION ASSOC-IBPSA, 175–182. [2] Di Cao, Yu Liu, Yinfan Wang, Qin Zhang, and Weihao Hu. 2025. Deep rein-forcement learning in power systems resilience: a review. IEEE Transactions on Reliability (2025). [3] Xin Chen et al . 2025. X-GridAgent: An LLM-Powered Agentic AI System for Assisting Power Grid Analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.20789 (2025). [4] Yongbao Chen, Peng Xu, Jiefan Gu, Ferdinand Schmidt, and Weilin Li. 2018. Measures to improve energy demand flexibility in buildings for demand response (DR): A review. Energy and buildings 177 (2018), 125–139. [5] Drury B Crawley, Linda K Lawrie, Frederick C Winkelmann, Walter F Buhl, Y Joe Huang, Curtis O Pedersen, Richard K Strand, Richard J Liesen, Daniel E Fisher, Michael J Witte, et al . 2001. EnergyPlus: creating a new-generation building energy simulation program. Energy and buildings 33, 4 (2001), 319–331. [6] Sarineh Hacopian Dolatabadi, Maedeh Ghorbanian, Pierluigi Siano, and Nikos D Hatziargyriou. 2020. An enhanced IEEE 33 bus benchmark test system for distribution system studies. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 36, 3 (2020), 2565–2572. [7] Jiwei Fang, Bin Zhang, Changwei Wang, Jin Wan, and Zhiwei Xu. 2025. Graph of Verification: Structured Verification of LLM Reasoning with Directed Acyclic Graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12509 (2025). [8] Chen Gao, Xiaochong Lan, Nian Li, Yuan Yuan, Jingtao Ding, Zhilun Zhou, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. 2024. Large language models empowered agent-based modeling and simulation: A survey and perspectives. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 11, 1 (2024), 1–24. [9] Yuncheng Hua, Sion Weatherhead, Mehdi Jafari, Hao Xue, and Flora D. Salim. 2025. SOCIA-∇: Textual Gradient Meets Multi-Agent Orchestration for Auto-mated Simulator Generation. arXiv:2505.12006 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2505.12006 [10] Yoichi Ishibashi and Yoshimasa Nishimura. 2024. Self-organized agents: A llm multi-agent framework toward ultra large-scale code generation and optimization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02183 (2024). [11] Mengshuo Jia, Zeyu Cui, and Gabriela Hug. 2025. Enhancing LLMs for Power Sys-tem Simulations: A Feedback-Driven Multi-Agent Framework. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 16, 6 (2025), 5556–5572. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2025.3589114 [12] Gang Jiang, Zhihao Ma, Liang Zhang, and Jianli Chen. 2024. EPlus-LLM: A large language model-based computing platform for automated building energy modeling. Applied Energy 367 (2024), 123431. [13] Gang Jiang, Zhihao Ma, Liang Zhang, and Jianli Chen. 2024. EPlus-LLM: A large language model-based computing platform for automated building energy modeling. Applied Energy 367 (2024), 123431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy. 2024.123431 [14] Javier Jiménez-Raboso, Alejandro Campoy-Nieves, Antonio Manjavacas-Lucas, Juan Gómez-Romero, and Miguel Molina-Solana. 2021. Sinergym: a building simulation and control framework for training reinforcement learning agents. In 

Proceedings of the 8th ACM international conference on systems for energy-efficient buildings, cities, and transportation . 319–323. [15] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al . 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. 

Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 9459–9474. [16] Chaojie Li, Xinghuo Yu, Wenwu Yu, Guo Chen, and Jianhui Wang. 2016. Effi-cient computation for sparse load shifting in demand side management. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 8, 1 (2016), 250–261. [17] Xinyi Li, Sai Wang, Siqi Zeng, Yu Wu, and Yi Yang. 2024. A survey on LLM-based multi-agent systems: workflow, infrastructure, and challenges. Vicinagearth 1, 1 (2024), 9. [18] Zhengbo Li, Haolan Yang, Youbo Liu, Yue Xiang, Hongjun Gao, Jingyao Liu, and Junyong Liu. 2026. OptDisPro: LLM-Based Multi-Agent Framework for Flexibly Adapting Heuristic Optimal DisFlow. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 17, 1 (2026), 794–805. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2025.3620496 [19] Mingzhe Liu, Liang Zhang, Jianli Chen, Wei-An Chen, Zhiyao Yang, L James Lo, Jin Wen, and Zheng O’Neill. 2025. Large language models for building energy applications: Opportunities and challenges. In Building Simulation , Vol. 18. Springer, 225–234. [20] Yikai Lu, Tinko Sebastian Bartels, Ruixiang Wu, Fanzeng Xia, Xudong Wang, Yifei Wu, Haoxiang Yang, and Tongxin Li. 2025. Open In-Context Energy Management Platform. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Conference on Future and Sustainable Energy Systems (E-Energy ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, AutoB2G: A Large Language Model-Driven Agentic Framework For Automated Building–Grid Co-Simulation BuildSys ’26, June 22–25, 2026, Banff, Alberta, Canada 

New York, NY, USA, 985–986. https://doi.org/10.1145/3679240.3734678 [21] Ali Malkawi, Stephen Ervin, Xu Han, Elence Xinzhu Chen, Sunghwan Lim, Spyridon Ampanavos, and Peter Howard. 2023. Design and applications of an IoT architecture for data-driven smart building operations and experimentation. 

Energy and Buildings 295 (2023), 113291. [22] Kingsley Nweye, Kathryn Kaspar, Giacomo Buscemi, Tiago Fonseca, Giuseppe Pinto, Dipanjan Ghose, Satvik Duddukuru, Pavani Pratapa, Han Li, Javad Moham-madi, et al . 2025. CityLearn v2: energy-flexible, resilient, occupant-centric, and carbon-aware management of grid-interactive communities. Journal of Building Performance Simulation 18, 1 (2025), 17–38. [23] Ruwei Pan, Hongyu Zhang, and Chao Liu. 2025. CodeCoR: An LLM-based self-reflective multi-agent framework for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.07811 (2025). [24] Aisling Pigott, Constance Crozier, Kyri Baker, and Zoltan Nagy. 2022. Gridlearn: Multiagent reinforcement learning for grid-aware building energy management. 

Electric power systems research 213 (2022), 108521. [25] Paul Scharnhorst, Baptiste Schubnel, Carlos Fernandez Bandera, Jaume Salom, Paolo Taddeo, Max Boegli, Tomasz Gorecki, Yves Stauffer, Antonis Peppas, and Chrysa Politi. 2021. Energym: A building model library for controller bench-marking. Applied Sciences 11, 8 (2021), 3518. [26] Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang Liu, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. 2025. Agent laboratory: Using llm agents as research assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04227 (2025). [27] Leon Thurner, Alexander Scheidler, Florian Schäfer, Jan-Hendrik Menke, Julian Dollichon, Friederike Meier, Steffen Meinecke, and Martin Braun. 2018. pan-dapower—an open-source python tool for convenient modeling, analysis, and optimization of electric power systems. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 33, 6 (2018), 6510–6521. [28] José R. Vázquez-Canteli, Jérôme Kämpf, Gregor Henze, and Zoltan Nagy. 2019. CityLearn v1.0: An OpenAI Gym Environment for Demand Response with Deep Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM International Conference on Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cities, and Transportation (New York, NY, USA) (BuildSys ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 356–357. https://doi.org/10.1145/3360322.3360998 [29] José R Vázquez-Canteli and Zoltán Nagy. 2019. Reinforcement learning for demand response: A review of algorithms and modeling techniques. Applied energy 235 (2019), 1072–1089. [30] Eric Wilson, Andrew Parker, Anthony Fontanini, Elaina Present, Janet Reyna, Rajendra Adhikari, Carlo Bianchi, Christopher CaraDonna, Matthew Dahlhausen, Janghyun Kim, et al . 2021. End-use load profiles for the us building stock . Technical Report. DOE Open Energy Data Initiative (OEDI); National Renewable Energy Laboratory. [31] Jiahan Xie, Akshay Ajagekar, and Fengqi You. 2023. Multi-agent attention-based deep reinforcement learning for demand response in grid-responsive buildings. 

Applied Energy 342 (2023), 121162.